The Project Gutenberg EBook of Eingeschneit, by Emil Frommel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Eingeschneit
       Eine Studentengeschichte

Author: Emil Frommel

Annotator: Wilhelm Bernhardt

Editor: Wilhelm Bernhardt

Release Date: June 24, 2007 [EBook #21917]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EINGESCHNEIT ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, La Monte H.P. Yarroll, Markus
Brenner and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.ne






  [Transcriber’s Note:

  This text uses utf-8 (unicode) file encoding. If the apostrophes and
  quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage, make sure your
  text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set to Unicode
  (UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font. As a last
  resort, use the latin-1 version of the file instead.

  In the original book, German was printed in fraktur (“gothic”) type
  while English and other languages were in Roman type. For this e-text,
  fraktur is shown in {braces} (introduction, notes, glossary), and
  Roman in {{double braces}} (main story).

  Boldface type is shown by =signs=.

  Notes are identified by their original page number: 8-2, 8-3...
  Errors, marked E-2, E-3..., are listed at the end of the text.]




Heath’s Modern Language Series

{Eingeschneit}

{Eine Studentengeschichte}

{von}

{Emil Frommel}

_WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES AND VOCABULARY_

BY

Dr. WILHELM BERNHARDT


BOSTON, U.S.A.

D.C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS

1908




Copyright, 1899

By Wilhelm Bernhardt




INTRODUCTION


The ranks of those illustrious men who a few decades ago, in war and
peace, stood by the side of Emperor Wilhelm I.--of glorious
memory--have gradually thinned. On the 9th of November, 1896, another
of the few then surviving--Dr. Emil Frommel, Supreme Councillor of
the Prussian Consistory, formerly chaplain to the Imperial Court and
pastor of the “Garnisonkirche” in Berlin--closed his eyes forever. He
was a man whose eminent gifts, both of mind and heart, had been
thoroughly tested and fully appreciated not only by his personal
friend, the old Emperor, but also by the latter’s son, the
noble-hearted and much lamented Friedrich, and his grandson, Wilhelm
II., the present shaper of the destiny of the Fatherland. Frommel was
a minister of the gospel “by divine grace,” possessed of a deep and
unaffected piety and love for mankind, an enrapturing pulpit-orator,
a scholar of clear and keen intellect, a man endowed with the purest
nobility of soul and intrepid courage, a writer for the masses, in
whom the acme of moral gravity appeared felicitously blended with an
always present and all refreshing humor, a fervent patriot and
accomplished courtier, though far from every courtly flattery and
obsequiousness.

Emil Frommel was a native of Southern Germany. Born at Karlsruhe, in
the grand-duchy of Baden, on January 5th, 1828, as the son of the
director of the ducal art gallery of that place, he devoted himself to
the study of theology at the universities of Halle, Erlangen, and
Heidelberg. In 1850, he was called as vicar to the village of
Alt-Lussheim, near Schwetzingen (Baden), whence four years later he
went as vicar to Karlsruhe, his native town. In 1864, he followed a
call to Barmen, that great industrial center of Westphalia, and again
five years later, he accepted the place as pastor of the
“Garnisonkirche” in Berlin. Hardly had he become familiar with his new
surroundings, when, in the summer of 1870, the Franco-German war broke
out. As a field chaplain he followed the army into France, camping
amidst his beloved “blue soldier-boys” during the siege of Strassburg,
and preaching to them, after the surrender of that old stronghold, the
first German sermon in St. Thomas’ church.--In June, 1871, on the
triumphal return of the Berlin garrison, Frommel occupied again the
pulpit of the “Garnisonkirche” and delivered in the presence of the
Emperor and the allied German sovereigns that memorable sermon in
commemoration of the heroic dead. On the occasion of the 150th
anniversary of the consecration of the “Garnisonkirche,” he was
created chaplain to the Imperial Court.

In an almost daily intercourse with his Imperial master, Frommel soon
had completely taken the heart of the affable old hero, whom from 1872
to 1887, year after year, he accompanied to “Wildbad Gastein,” the
famous watering place in the Austrian Alps, where in the little
Protestant church of that Catholic district the old warrior joined the
few Lutheran mountaineers in their devotional exercises, listening to
the words of his chaplain, whose sermon he could not afford to
miss--as he said--for a single Sunday in the year. “I am particularly
indebted to you,” once remarked the Emperor, “that in your sermons you
never refer to me.”--“Well, your majesty,” replied Frommel, “I think
that it must be quite a hard task for you to bear the crown six days
of each week, and that on the Sabbath you should have a right to be
relieved from your burden and feel like a plain Christian in the house
of the Lord.”

It was by no means in the Imperial household alone that Frommel was so
exceptionally honored; the highest circles of Berlin society, artists,
diplomats, literary and military men, religious and infidels, all
strove in rivalry to pay homage to the popular pastor of the
“Garnisonkirche.” His wedding-, christening-, and burial-sermons were
masterpieces of oratory; though plainly conceived and plainly
delivered and free from all and every unctious pathos, they abounded
with thought, true feeling, and poetical beauty. Frommel was destined
to speak at the graves of most of the great leaders of the war of
1870-71, including Prince August of Württemberg, Moltke, Roon,
Alvensleben, Kirchbach, and Kameke; the danger to become, on such
occasions, a panegyrist, he has always judiciously avoided, thanks to
his delicate taste and independence of conviction.

It would be a great mistake to suspect that the adulation of those
foremost in life and society had been able to dazzle even for a moment
Frommel’s sound judgment or make him turn his back to the other half
of humanity. Quite the contrary! His generous heart beat warmest of
all for the great community of the poor and afflicted. The thousands
of Berlin cab-drivers were his most devoted friends, and to the
amelioration of the deplorable lot of the German waiters he directed
his loving interest. The endless train of mendicants who at all times
besieged the parsonage, never knew him but “from his very best side.”
For an old vagabond tailor who had seen better days, he secures work,
thus laying a solid foundation for an honest and certain existence; in
the superannuated sick and penniless actor, who salutes him as “a
colleague in an allied profession,” he readily discovers a parson’s
scion, and dismisses him with a most positive proof of his generosity.

What wonder that the pastor of the “Garnisonkirche” had gradually
grown to be one of the most popular figures of the national capital of
Germany, and this all the more so as he, the southerner by birth,
education, and mode of viewing things, had so completely caught the
peculiar Berlin humor and ready wit in address and reply, that in no
wise he differed from the true-born Berliner! And on what excellent
terms was he with the young folks not only of his immense
congregation, but of Berlin, nay, of the whole country, wherever he
met them on his extended tours through the Empire!

Amidst the most various and trying engagements, Frommel lived in
Berlin for twenty-six years. What an immense amount of work he
accomplished within that time, can be understood from his own
statement in his farewell sermon of Sunday, April 19, 1896, where he
said: “While in Berlin, I have baptized 1838 children, united in
wedlock 1526 couples, confirmed 1980 school-children, and buried 1709
dead. Of the churches in Berlin, I have preached in all but one, and
in sixty-five cities all over Germany I have delivered either sermons
or lectures.” So we cannot much wonder that on the occasion of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of his installation as pastor of the
“Garnisonkirche,” he submitted to his Imperial master the petition for
retirement from his charge. His request was most graciously complied
with, and at the same time he was commissioned by Imperial brevet as
an “_officer à la suite of the army_,” a distinction never before in
the history of Germany conferred upon a military chaplain.--Soon
after, in the spring of 1896, Emperor Wilhelm II. called him to his
castle, Ploen, charmingly situated upon the shore of the Ploener Lake
in the Prussian province of Schleswig-Holstein, to superintend the
tuition of his two oldest sons, Crown-Prince Wilhelm and Prince Eitel
Friedrich. Full of happy anticipation of a quiet and restful evening
of life in one of the most idyllic parts of Germany, Frommel entered
upon his new and honorable duties with a truly youthful vigor and
enthusiasm, but alas--after a few months’ stay at Ploen, owing to an
old ailment which had reappeared under more alarming symptoms than
ever before, he had to submit to a chirurgical operation, and it was
under the knives of the surgeons that on the 9th day of November,
1896, Emil Frommel breathed his last, at the age of sixty-eight years.

Frommel’s personal appearance was the harmonious representation of his
inner life. His kind and youthful face, brightened by benevolent blue
eyes, was encircled by long and full silver-white hair and made such a
deep impression, that once seen it could not easily be forgotten.

   * * *

As a writer, Frommel is best known as the author of a long series of
stories for the masses, which on account of their unaffected piety,
vigorous language and healthy humor have become exceedingly popular
with all classes. They are published by Wiegandt & Grieben (Berlin),
in eleven volumes under the general title, {„Gesammelte
Schriften--Erzählungen, Aufsätze und Vorträge.“} Our story
{„Eingeschneit“} taken from the sixth volume ({„Aus der
Sommerfrische“}) relates a humorous travelling adventure from the
author’s own merry college-life, when a student of divinity at the
university of Erlangen. It will not be a difficult task for the reader
to discover which of the three jovial young fellows, who, one fine
summer-day, started to see for themselves whether the world really is
as round as their professor had claimed, was the one who in after-life
became so widely known as “Emil Frommel.”

                                          WILHELM BERNHARDT.

  Washington, D.C.,
  _February, 1899._




=Eingeschneit=


Es war in den Jahren, da einen[1-1] weder die Wissenschaft noch der
Geldbeutel durch ihre Schwere drücken, als sich etliche Studenten von
Erlangen[1-2] aufmachten, um die Welt zu besehen, ob sie auch wirklich
so rund sei,[1-3] wie der Herr[1-4] Professor sagte. Es[1-5] waren
ihrer[1-6] drei, die dies Experiment machen wollten. So[1-7]
verschieden sie auch sonst waren, in einem[1-8] waren sie eins: sie
waren drei wackere Musikanten. Der eine sang einen hohen Tenor und
brauchte keine Feuerleiter, um zum hohen {{C}} hinaufzuklettern; der
zweite hatte eine schöne melodische Mittelstimme, und des Basses
Grundgewalt[1-9] war dem dritten verliehen. In hübschem
„wassergeprüften“[1-10] Sacke verpackt war das Notenbuch eines jeden
umgehängt, um gleich losschießen zu können. Zwei hatten einen
ehrlichen Ranzen, der dritte aber hatte von einer „Nichte“[1-11] eine
Reisetasche, mit Blumenbouquetten verziert, erhalten und trug sie
derselben zu Ehren. Die Finanzmittel waren sehr mäßig und auf kein
„{{Hotel du Lac}}“[1-12] oder desgleichen, wohl aber auf die niedere
Tierwelt berechnet, auf „Bär“ und „Ochsen,“ „Hirsch“ und „Schwan“ und
im Notfall auch auf Heuschober und Tannenbäume. Aber die klingenden
Stimmen und die klingende und singende Brust waren mehr wert als die
klingenden Münzen. „Hat[2-1] man nichts[2-2] mehr, dann sieht man auch
nichts mehr, so[2-3] wird rechts abgeschwenkt und umgekehrt,“ das war
die Reiseparole. So die drei.

   *   *   *   *   *

Derweilen sie ausziehen und mit feinem Instinkt die Gassen vermeiden,
in welchen es noch etwas zu zahlen[2-4] gab, ging zu London in
Regentstreet Nr.[2-5] 86 ein großer hagerer Herr, dem man den
Engländer auf tausend Schritt ansah, in seiner Stube auf und ab. Auf
dem Tische lagen der rote Bädeker,[2-6] der auf englisch „{{Murray}}“
heißt, und Landkarten. Er hatte offenbar Reisegedanken. Und niemand
hinderte ihn daran,[2-7] weder sein Weib noch sein Geld. Denn das
erste besaß er nicht, desto mehr aber vom zweiten. Ob ihn am Fuß das
Zipperlein plagte oder im oberen Stockwerke der Spleen, oder ob er um
diese Zeit überhaupt gewohnt war, sich in London unsichtbar zu machen,
das weiß der Verfasser nicht zu sagen.--Er öffnete das Fenster und
schaute hinaus auf die wogende Straße, auf der sich in der lauen
Sommernacht die Leute herumtrieben, klopfte an sein Barometer[2-8] und
sah nach, wie viel Uhr[2-9] es darauf geschlagen,[2-10] und klingelte
zuletzt. Ein alter rotköpfiger Bedienter in herrschaftlichem Kleide
kam herein. „James, wir reisen[2-11] morgen um 10 Uhr. Du wirst[2-12]
die Koffer packen und nichts vergessen. Den Thee habe ich hier, die
Maschine ist dort. Sorge für alles, alter Junge, und für Dich
selbst. Du weckst mich früh um 6,“ so befahl in weichem Tone der Herr
dem Rotkopf.--

„Gehen wir weit?“ fragte dieser den Herrn, „und auf[3-1] wie lange
ungefähr?“

„Nun, James, ein paar Wochen werden uns gut thun. _Wohin_, das weiß
ich selbst noch nicht, wir gehen zuerst nach dem Kontinent, und das
andere findet[3-2] sich.“

„Immer noch der alte,“[3-3] murmelte der Rotkopf, als er draußen
war,--„man weiß nie, wohin es[3-4] geht.“

Am nächsten Morgen fuhren die beiden nach London Bridgestation und
sausten mit dem Zuge nach Dover.[3-5]

   *   *   *   *   *

Derweilen aber stieg im lieben, deutschen Vaterlande ein Pärchen in
die bekränzte Hochzeitskutsche. Sie kamen vom Hochzeitsaltar und
Hochzeitsessen und hatten sich in der Stille davongemacht. Nur die
Mutter der Braut war mitgegangen und hatte dem Töchterlein das graue
Reisekleid angelegt und es[3-6] mit Thränen gesegnet. Es ist ja
freilich nur _ein_ Schritt aus dem Elternhause in die
Hochzeitskutsche, aber es ist eben nicht ein Schritt wie ein anderer.
Darum schaute ihr die Mutter noch lange nach, bis der Wagen um die
Waldecke bog und ihren[3-7] Blicken entschwand. Die zwei freuten
sich, daß sie endlich ohne Onkel und Tanten waren und fuhren fröhlich
in die Welt hinein zur Eisenbahnstation.

„Nun geht’s[3-8] in die weite, weite Welt hinein, liebes Kind,“ sagte
der junge Mann, „da wirst du, Sandhase,[3-9] deine blauen Wunder
sehen.“

„Ach, bei uns ist’s auch schön,“ meinte das junge Frauchen, „aber mit
dir fahre ich schon[4-1] in die weite Welt hinein. Es ist mir zwar
ein wenig gruselig dabei zu Mut[4-2] vor den vielen Menschen, was man
da reden soll.“

„Sag’ du ihnen nur,[4-3] daß du mich lieb hast, und daß es[4-4] keinen
bessern Mann auf der Welt giebt als mich,“ meinte bescheiden[4-5] der
junge Eheherr, „dann hast du gewiß nichts dummes gesagt.“

   *   *   *   *   *

So fuhren die zwei von dannen und wußten nicht, daß der
Landgerichtsassessor Robert Berneck aus Buchau[4-6] im bayrischen Wald
sich bereits Jahre lang[4-7] auf eine Reise gefreut hatte. Endlich
hatte er Urlaub erhalten. Ein stiller Mondschein[4-8] lagerte sich
schon über das Haupt des Mannes, wiewohl er erst in dem Anfang der
Vierzig stand. Das Amtsleben hatte ihm das ganze bayrische[4-9]
Wappen, den Löwen mitsamt den blauweißen Weckschnitten derart
ins[4-10] Gesicht gestempelt, daß kaum noch eine Spur des eigentlichen
Menschen zu sehen war, der in früheren Jahren nicht so ganz übel[4-11]
gewesen sein mochte.--Er hatte lange zu thun, bis er seine
Siebensachen bei einander hatte. Nachgerade hatte er sich an so viele
Bedürfnisse gewöhnt, und vorsorglich für alle Zukunft wanderte[4-12]
in das Ränzlein, das er noch aus alten Tagen besaß, eine ganze
Haushaltung nebst einer Apotheke. Utensilien, wie Salben für frisch
gelaufene Blasen an den Füßen, Opodeldoc[4-13] für mögliche
Verletzungen, Kamillenthee für Leibschneiden, Storchenfett für
Entzündungen waren nicht vergessen. Eine neue graue Joppe mit grünem
Aufschlag, ein spitziger Tyrolerhut mit Gemsbart,[5-1] alles
elegant[5-2] hergestellt nach seiner Angabe, vollendeten den
Anzug. Bergschuhe, mit dicken Nägeln beschlagen, wurden angezogen, und
der Alpenstock, den er von einem Freund geerbt hatte, stand auch
bereit. Als seine Lena, die niederbayrische Haushälterin, hereintrat
und ihren Herrn so sah, schlug sie die Hände zusammen und meinte im
stillen, ihr Herr sei[5-3] wohl nicht ganz bei Trost.[5-4] Denn bisher
hatte sie ihn nur in seinem ehrbaren Landassessorrock und in der Mütze
mit der Krone[5-5] und dem „L“ darunter gesehen und hatte jedesmal vor
ihm einen Knix gemacht, als ob er die „Hochwürden“ des Orts wäre,[5-6]
jetzt aber war er ihr[5-7] ganz in die Abteilung „Mensch“[5-8]
heruntergesunken.

„Nun, Lena, gefall’ ich dir nicht so?“ meinte der
Landgerichtsassessor. „Ja,“ sagte sie, „jung schaun’s schon völlig
aus, aber halt a bissel verputzelt und kennen thut’s Ihna koan Mensch
hier in der Gegend.“

„Das will ich gerade, Lena. Ich will Mensch sein, ganzer, voller
Mensch, und hingehen, wo mich niemand kennt und ahnt, daß ich ein
Beamter bin.“

„A Mensch will er sein,“ murmelte die Lena vor[5-9] sich, „sonst hat
er als[5-10] gesagt, daß er a Aktenvieh sei.“

„Morgen geht’s[5-11] fort, Lena, hier sind die Schlüssel, und wecken
thust mich auch, denn ich muß fort,[5-12] eh’ mich einer von den
Herren hier sieht.“

„Da haben’s völlig recht,“ meinte die Lena, „denn koan Mensch thät’s
Ihna für unsern gnädigen[6-1] Herrn halten.“

Des Morgens früh blies der himmelblaue[6-2] Postillon hinaus in die
frische Morgenluft. Der Postexpeditor schmunzelte, als er den
Landgerichtsassessor so „verputzelt“ sah und wünschte „allerseits[6-3]
eine glückliche Reise.“ Nach fünf Stunden saß die graue Joppe im
Eisenbahncoupé und that völlig fremd den Reisenden gegenüber.

   *   *   *   *   *

Und wieder saßen derweilen im Zuge von Stuttgart[6-4] her eine trotz
ihrer Dreißig noch jugendlich aussehende Dame mit drei
gleichgekleideten jungen Mädchen von fünfzehn bis siebzehn
Jahren. Wer[6-5] sich einigermaßen auf Menschen zu verstehen glaubte,
dem schien es ganz klar: „Institutsvorsteherin nebst drei
Pflegebefohlenen.“ Die letzteren mußten wohl von denen[6-6] sein, die
zur geringen Freude der ersteren auch die großen Ferien dableiben,
weil ihre Eltern selbst verreist sind. Anna, Lina und Elsa hießen die
drei Mädchen, die immer lachten, wenn[6-7] sie der Blick ihrer Hüterin
nicht traf. Denn alles kam ihnen lächerlich vor. Jugendlust und
Freude, Unschuld und Kindlichkeit schauten aus den[6-8] Augen, sie
schienen so froh, dem[6-9] Schulszepter entronnen zu sein, und
wären,[6-10] wenn man sie aufs Gewissen gefragt hätte, am liebsten
allein gereist. Und doch schaute die Dame nicht grämlich drein; nur
dann, wenn[6-11] das Lachen zu toll wurde, oder wenn eine aus der
wohlgefüllten Reisetasche einen allzugroßen Brocken hinunterwürgen
wollte, sah sie mahnend auf. Wenn sie aber still einmal schlief, da
zuckte es[7-1] über die schönen Züge wie Sonnenschein, als dächte[7-2]
sie ihrer eigenen schönen Jugendtage.

   *   *   *   *   *

So verschieden diese sämtlichen Reisenden auszogen, keiner dachte, daß
sie sich alle an _einem_[7-8] Orte unter _einem_ Dache finden würden,
und doch geschah es so. Alle hatten dasselbe Ziel gewählt: das
Salzkammergut.[7-4] Die einen wollten von da über die Tauern[7-5]
hinuntersteigen nach Kärnthen[7-6] und von da hinab nach Italien--die
andern kamen schon daher und wollten den Weg durchs Salzkammergut
zurück.[7-7]

Die Studenten waren im Stellwagen, der von Werfen[7-8] nach Lend
fährt, bereits mit der „Institutsvorsteherin“ bekannt geworden, die
mit ihren Pflegebefohlenen vorn im Coupé saß. Aber freilich nicht
so,[7-9] daß sie einander gesehen hätten. Das[7-10] geschah aber so:
Auf der Fahrt flatterte ein blauer Schleier aus dem Coupé lustig
heraus am Wagen hin, worin hinten die Studios saßen. Da dachte der
eine:[7-11] „Wer mag wohl[7-12] hinter dem blauen Schleier sein?“ Er
träumte sich in den Gedanken hinein und zuletzt ward[7-13] der
Schleier bei seiner Flatterhaftigkeit[7-14] festgehalten und mittelst
einer Stecknadel ihm ein beschriebener Zettel angesteckt. Der Vers war
von den dreien in Kompagnie geschmiedet und lautete:

        Blauer Schleier--blauer Himmel!
        Blaue Augen--blauer See!
        Mir[8-1] wird wohl im Weltgetümmel,
        Wenn ich nur was[8-2] blaues seh’!
        Blaue Augen! meine Wahl--
        Seid gegrüßt viel’ tausendmal!

Er flatterte hinüber und ward dort angehalten. Man hörte von drüben
nichts als ein Kichern und Lachen, und bald darauf flatterte der
Schleier wieder hinaus in die Luft. Ein neuer Zettel war
angesteckt. Und darauf stand:

        Fehlgetroffen![8-3] Nichts von Bläue,
        Weder Aug’ noch sonst etwas!
        Unter’m Hut ein altes Fräulein!
        Sagt, Ihr[8-4] Herr’n, gefiel[8-5] Euch das?

Wieder ward der Schleier von den dreien gefangen, der Zettel
abgenommen und bald flatterte wieder ein neuer Vers hinüber:

        Auch ein altes, graues Fräulein
        Ist uns lieb und ehrenwert--
        Ist[8-6] nur unter’m blauen Schleier
        Ihr ein junges Herz beschert!--

Noch zweimal ging der Schleier hin und her; den[8-7] Studenten ging
aber allmählich die Poesie aus, und sie zogen die Liederbücher hervor
und fingen an zu singen. Im ganzen Stellwagen ward’s still, als die
frischen Studentenlieder[8-8] so hinaus in die Luft schmetterten.

Als man in Lend ausstieg, wo sich der Weg teilt nach der Gastein[9-1]
durch die finstere Klamm, und nach Zell[9-2] am See dem Pinzgau[9-3]
zu--trafen die Studenten mit ihren Korrespondentinnen zusammen. Der
zweite Tenor schritt auf die „Vorsteherin“ zu[9-4] und entschuldigte
sich in wohlgesetzten Ausdrücken über[9-5] die Freiheit, die sie sich
erlaubt. „Sie haben sich nicht zu entschuldigen, Sie haben uns durch
Ihre Verse und Ihren Gesang die Fahrt verschönert. Hier in der
herrlichen Natur ist auch dem Menschen mehr gestattet als in den
dumpfen Städten,“ antwortete das Fräulein. Die drei jungen Mädchen
kicherten sich[9-6] wieder an, als sie die flotten Poeten sahen und
gaben verlegen Antwort auf ihre Fragen. Nach einer Stunde trennte man
sich.[9-7] Die Studenten zogen dem Pinzgau zu, das Fräulein mit ihrem
Anhang hinauf nach Gastein. Man wünschte sich[9-8] allerseits eine
glückliche Reise. Die Studenten sangen am Postwagen noch eins[9-9] von
den blauen Augen:

        Meiner Liebsten blaue Augen
        Sind dem schönsten Azur gleich,
        Und ein Blick in diese Augen
        Ist ein Blick ins Himmelreich ...

Die blauen Schleier nickten dankend und fuhren hinauf den steilen
Weg.--

   *   *   *   *   *

Auf dem Pasterzengletscher,[9-10] der sich hinter dem
Fuscherthal[9-11] hinaufdehnt, schritt eine hagere Gestalt in
verwittertem[9-12] Lodenkittel, grünen, hohen Strümpfen und spitzem
Hut einem etwas behäbigen Herrn voran, der öfters stehen blieb und
sich[10-1] den Schweiß von der Stirn wischte. So sicher der Alte trotz
des schweren Ranzens und dicken Plaids einherstieg, immer schweigend
und ruhig voran, so keuchend kam der zweite hinterher. Das
Alpensteigen schien ihm ein ungewohntes Geschäft und Vergnügen zu
sein, und er machte ein so verzweifeltes Gesicht, als wollte[10-2] er
zu sich selber sagen: „Das war wieder einmal ein mordsdummer Streich
von dir, daß du dich hast da hinauf locken lassen,[10-3] du
hättest[10-4] auch die Berge von unten ansehen können.“ Aber jetzt
war[10-5] nichts mehr zu machen, zurück war der Weg noch mühsamer als
hinauf, darum vorwärts über den Schnee und die Eisschrunden!

„Geben’s fein Obacht, daß[10-6] nit fall’n und nit z’ lang stehen
bleiben! Dös thut koan gut,“ mahnte der alte Führer.

„Ja, Ihr[10-7] habt gut reden,“ keuchte der Hintermann. „Ihr seid die
Sach’ gewohnt, aber unsereins,[10-8] was alleweil in der Stuben sitzt,
brächt’s[10-9] halt nit fertig.“

Der geneigte Leser merkt, wen er vor sich hat. Es ist unser
Landgerichtsassessor, der so keucht und spricht. Hundertmal hat er
schon den Pasterzengletscher und alle anderen Gletscher in der Welt
verwünscht und an seine Lena gedacht, die es jetzt so gut habe,[10-10]
weil ihr Herr fort sei, und er hatte sich doch[10-11] so auf die
Sommerfrische gefreut und sich einmal recht „auslaufen“ wollen. Jetzt
that ihm jeder Knochen weh, und nur eins tröstete ihn: eine Rast im
Tauernhause,[10-12] die ihm in baldige Aussicht gestellt wurde.

Sie[11-1] sollte ihm eher, als er dachte, zu teil werden.

Der alte Führer stand nämlich plötzlich still, schaute nach allen
Seiten hin und witterte wie ein Gemsbock in die Luft hinaus. Er
beobachtete genau den Zug der Wolken, den Schnee unter den Füßen und
die einzelnen Bergspitzen. Der Landgerichtsassessor spitzte auch die
Ohren so hoch wie sein spitziger Tyrolerhut, aber er merkte trotz
allen Spitzens[11-2] nichts. Endlich brach der Alte das Schweigen und
sagte: „Gnädiger[11-3] Herr! Können’s Ihnen nit a bissel anstrengen?
Es ist so a Schneetreiben im Anzug und gut wär’s schon, wenn m’r
unterkimmet!“ Das fuhr dem Assessor in die Glieder, denn er hatte in
Geschichten schauriges vom Schneetreiben gelesen. „’s ist doch[11-4]
nicht gefährlich?“ sagte er halblaut.

„Ha, g’fährlich is[11-5] rechtschaffen schon, wenn wir noch auf’m Eis
sind. Aber so schnell kommt’s grad nit.“

Der Assessor vergaß seine Blasen und seine nassen Füße und trieb zur
Eile. Der Alte verbiß sich das Lachen über seinen Trabanten. Sie
stiegen rüstig zu. Ringsumher ward es immer finsterer, die Bergspitzen
gingen in leichtes Grau über, und dem Assessor jagten schon einzelne
spitzige, eisharte Körner ins Gesicht. „Das ist der Anfang vom
Schneetreiben,“ sagte er vor sich hin,[11-6] und vor seinem Geiste
stand die behagliche Amtsstube in Buchau, wo im Winter der Buchklotz
knallte und der Amtsdiener fragte: „’s wird[11-7] dem Herrn Assessor
doch nicht zu kalt sein?“--Nach stundenlangem Marsche, auf welchem
jeder so seine eigenen Gedanken hatte, während der Schnee immer
dichter fiel, zeigte sich in der Ferne ein Haus.

„Dös ist das Tauernhaus, gnädiger Herr, do können’s Ihna ausruhen.“

„Wie weit ist’s noch bis hin?“[12-1] fragte der Assessor.

„Ha, so a zwanzig Büchsenschuß[12-2] werden’s[12-3] völlig sein,“
meinte der Alte. Der Assessor wußte jetzt gerade so viel wie
vorher. Denn er hatte mit Büchsenschüssen nur bei Gelegenheit von
Forstfreveln zu thun und wußte über die Tragweite des Geschosses
keinen weitern Bescheid.

Endlich erreichten sie im dicksten Gestöber das Haus. Der Alte schob
den Riegel an der Thür zurück, schüttelte den Schnee vom Lodenrock und
vom Ranzen, den er abwarf, und schritt mit seinem Herrn der Thüre
zu. Als sie dieselbe öffneten, drang ihnen ein warmer Duft entgegen,
der dem Assessor die Hitze in die vom[12-4] Schneetreiben gehörig
verarbeiteten Wangen jagte.

Eine bunte Gesellschaft saß schon an den Tischen[12-5] und wandte sich
neugierig nach dem Ankömmling um, der sofort auch vom Kopf bis zur
Fußsohle gemustert ward. Der Assessor grüßte verlegen zuerst nach den
Damen hinüber, deren[12-6] vier auf einem Klümplein bei einander
saßen, eine ältere und drei jüngere. Neben ihnen saß ein junges Paar.
Alle hatten sich’s bequem gemacht. Um den großen Ofen hingen die
nassen Kleider und dampften aus, und zwölf Schuhe standen unten und
warteten aufs Trocknen. Es ist so etwas eigenes, wenn Leute sich’s
schon heimisch gemacht haben in einem Gasthause, als ob sie da zu
Hause wären,[13-1] und dann einem Wildfremden, der noch dazukommt,
zuschauen, bis dieser sich auch langsam häuslich niederläßt. Die
ersteren haben das Gefühl der Sicherheit und schauen von ihrem festen
Sitze herunter auf den, der sich erst seine Unterkunft gründen
muß. Der Assessor suchte sich[13-2] eine Ecke aus, dicht unter dem
grobgeschnitzten Kruzifix,[13-3] das aus den verdorrten
Palmsonntags-Birkenzweigen hervorschaute, in die sich die Fliegen als
ihr Nachtquartier verzogen, und bestellte sich einen roten
Tyroler.[13-4] Lang saß er nicht allein, denn draußen hörte man[13-5]
Stimmen, und drei junge Leute traten dicht beschneit herein. Die drei
jungen Damen schauten auf und steckten die Köpfe zusammen und
kicherten, als sie dieselben hereinkommen sahen. „Da sind sie wieder,“
sagte die kluge Elsa, „ganz gewiß sie sind’s.“[13-6] Ja, sie waren’s,
die Studenten vom Werfener Stellwagen her.

„Was tausend![13-7] Bei diesem Wetter kommen Sie hier herauf, meine
Damen,“ sagte der erste Tenor. „Wir wären[13-8] fast verunglückt; das
ist Ihnen[13-9] ein schauderhaftes Wetter, da sollte man keinen Hund,
geschweige denn eine Dame, herausjagen.“

„Hatten Sie keinen Führer?“ fragte die Dame, über die letzte
Artigkeit[13-10] etwas lächelnd.

„Führer? {{Jamais!}}[13-11] Wir gehören zum Verein „Selbsthilfe“.
‚Als[13-12] der Nase nach,‘[13-13] hatte der letzte Senne gesagt, ‚da
können’s nit fehlen.‘ Und da sind wir endlich mit unsern verfrorenen
Nasen hier aufgestoßen, als wir das Licht flimmern sahen, denn von
Nasen war rein nichts mehr zu sehen, so[14-1] rot sie auch funkelten.“

Die drei standen immer noch, der Assessor verwunderte sich und
gedachte der schönen Zeit, wo auch er sich einst die Freiheit
genommen,[14-2] ohne weiteres mit wildfremden Mägdlein anzubinden. Das
Pärchen aber begriff bald den Zusammenhang der Sache und freute sich
des Wiedersehens der Fremden, denn in aller Eile hatten die
geschwätzigen drei Elstern[14-3] den jungen Eheleuten von ihrer
Begegnung mit den Studenten und von den Gedichten erzählt.

Dem dicken Tauernwirt dauerte die Sache mit der Vorstellung etwas zu
lange, und er fragte darum die drei: „Schaffen’s auch einen roten
Tyroler--?“

„Ja freilich, teurer Onkel,“[14-4] rief der Baß, „roten und weißen und
grauen, wie’s kommt, nur etwas nasses bei dem nassen Wetter.“

Der Assessor lachte wieder in seiner Ecke und rückte etwas näher. So
war er auch einst in eine Herberge gefallen und hatte gefragt: „Herr
Wirt! Was kostet das Mondviertel in Essig und Öl, ich zahl’s.“ Die
drei setzten sich zu ihm, er stellte sich vor, und bald waren sie im
tiefsten Gespräch. Der Assessor war froh, daß eine goldene Brücke von
ihm zu den Damen hinüber geschlagen war, denn er fühlte sich längst zu
irgend einer passenden Rede verpflichtet und hatte nur nicht gewußt,
wie sie anbringen. Jetzt wurde auch er durch die Studenten
vorgestellt, und die Tische rückten zusammen. Man erzählte
sich,[14-5] woher man kam. Das Pärchen, das[15-1] wir von früher
kennen und in die Hochzeitskutsche geleitet haben, kam von Italien
herauf, die Damen von Gastein kamen ebenfalls daher, die Studios
hatten sich im Pinzgau herumgetrieben und kamen den Weg des Assessors.

„Ich muß mir nur[15-2] einmal die Wirtschaft hier ansehen, Ihr Leute,“
sagte der zweite Tenor, „denn das ist immer das erste,“[15-3] und fort
war er. Nach einer starken Viertelstunde kam er von seiner
Entdeckungsreise zurück.

„Nun, wie schaut’s[15-4] aus?“ riefen die zwei andern Studenten.

„Wie’s ausschaut? Gar nicht ausschauen thut’s.[15-5] Draußen heult’s
und stürmt’s, und wenn’s so fortmacht, so sind wir morgen alle hier
eingeschneit, daß an ein Fortkommen nicht zu denken ist. Das ist das
erste. Zum[15-6] andern: mit dem Schlafen ist’s alle[15-7] für diese
Nacht. Der bessere und schönere Teil der menschlichen Gesellschaft,
diese Damen hier, werden auf Stroh schlafen. Für Mannspersonen aber
ist kein Raum in dieser Hütte. Das einzige Bett hat ein natureller
Engländer inne, und zu seinen Füßen wird sein Sancho Pansa[15-8]
schlafen, ein Rotkopf, sage ich Euch, so brennend, daß man die Pfeife
an ihm anzünden kann. Der Engländer kocht sich eben seinen Thee auf
höchsteigner Maschine, und der Rotkopf hilft ihm. Er fragte mich, da
die Thür offen stand, etwas auf englisch, und ich sagte ihm mein
einziges englisches Wort, aber fein,[15-9] {{’Yes’}} sagte ich, und
damit war’s gut.[15-10]--Aber das beste habt Ihr nicht gesehen: Da
hinten[15-11] sitzt Euch[15-12] in einem Mordsqualm eine Stube voll
biedrer[15-13] Leute bei einander, alte und junge, Kerls[16-1] wie die
Gemsböcke und wie die alten Tannen mit weißem Flechtenmoos behaftet,
und dazwischen am Spinnrocken sitzt ein Mägdlein mit treuherzigen
blauen Augen. Die erzählen sich[16-2] Geschichten, aber zu verstehen
ist[16-3] kein Wort. Aber in der Küche da prasselt’s,[16-4] da giebt’s
Kaiserschmarren und Krapfen. Zu essen giebt’s genug, das ist immerhin
anerkennenswert. Wir bleiben hier unten[16-5] und richten uns häuslich
ein für diese Nacht. So, nun wißt Ihr Bescheid, und die Verhandlung
kann beginnen. Herr Assessor--{{comment[16-6] trouvez-vous
cela?}}--sagt der Franzose, und der Deutsche fragt: „Um Vergebung, was
ist Ihre geneigte Ansicht hierüber?“

Der zweite Tenor sprach das alles in _einem_ Atemzug und so drollig,
daß alle lachten. Der Assessor war verblüfft; er hatte sich im stillen
schon auf sein Zimmer gefreut, um dort allerhand chirurgische
Operationen vorzunehmen, mit denen sein Ranzen in genauer Verbindung
stand.

Bald dampften die Schüsseln auf dem Tische, denn alle[16-7] hatten
sich zu einem einzigen vereint, und der Assessor saß mitten unter den
jungen Mädchen, zu seiner Rechten das ältere Fräulein. Die Studenten
teilten sich mit dem jungen Eheherrn in die anderen. Das Gespräch war
lebendig, jeder wußte von Abenteuern, von Gemsjägern und Sennerinnen
zu erzählen, und am[16-8] aufgeräumtesten war der Assessor.

Nach dem Imbiß baten die Damen, es[16-9] möchten doch die Studenten
wieder ein Lied singen, wie damals im Stellwagen. Schnell waren diese
bei der Hand, und fröhlich klangen die Terzette durch den warmen
Raum. Unvermerkt hatte sich[17-1] die Thür aufgethan, und aus der
hintern Stube waren die Insassen hergewandert, als sie vorne singen
hörten. Der alte Führer des Assessors vorndran, und zwischendrin die
flachsköpfige Spinnerin.

„Dös sollt’ mi doch rechtschaffen Wunder nehma, wenn mein Herr[17-2]
singen könnt’,“ sagte der Alte. „Der giebt sonst koan Laut[17-3] von
sich“--und wirklich, er sang zu seinem eigenen und des Führers
Erstaunen. Er hatte ja eine herrliche Baritonstimme, aber seit Jahren
hatte er kein Lied mehr gesungen, wie er behauptete. Aber hier bei den
fröhlichen Stimmen gingen ihm Herz und Lippen auf. Zur Vorsorge hatten
die Studios noch Noten für eine vierte Stimme mit, wenn je einmal sich
noch ein Musikant unterwegs zum Quartett fände.[17-4] Es[17-5] waren
ja alte, liebe Lieder, die sie sangen, die er einst auch in jüngeren
Tagen bei Ständchen und Morgengrüßen gesungen. Fröhlich klang das alte
Quartett:

        Mir ist auf der Welt nichts lieber[17-6]
        Als das Stübchen, wo ich bin,
        Denn da wohnt mir gegenüber
        Eine schöne Nachbarin!

„Herr Assessor, Ihre schöne Nachbarin in Buchau soll[17-7] leben!“
rief der muntere zweite Tenor, „die Tochter des
Landgerichtspräsidenten.“

„Der[17-8] ist leider selbst noch ledig,“ antwortete trocken der
Assessor. „Mir wohnt nichts[17-9] gegenüber als ein Schmied, dessen
Gesellen mich morgens um vier Uhr aus dem süßen Schlummer jagen, das
ist eine grausame Nachbarschaft.“

Er war eben daran, seinen Jammer näher zu beschreiben, als durch die
Hauptthüre der hochaufgeschossene Engländer mit seinem Rotkopf im
Gefolge eintrat.

                „Sankt Florian[18-1]
                Zünd’t[18-2] Häuser an!“

sagte leise der zweite Tenor, auf den Rotkopf schauend. Die Mädchen
hielten sich die Taschentücher vor den Mund, der Eheherr griff nach
seinem roten Tyroler und steckte tief das Gesicht in das Glas. Nur die
„Institutsvorsteherin“ und der Assessor hielten Balance[18-3] mit
sicherm Takte. Der Engländer aber sagte in etwas englisiertem, aber
sonst anständigem Deutsch:

„Ich haben[18-4] gehabt sehr großes Vergnügen in meinem Zimmer, zu
hören solch schönes Gesang. Ich komme zu bitten, daß ich noch mehr
höre.“

Er sagte das mit solch edlem Anstand, daß einer der Studios aufstand,
ihm seinen Stuhl anzubieten und ihn einzuladen, wenn ihm die
Gesellschaft behagte,[18-5] sich niederzulassen. Er stellte ihm alle
vor und bat ihn dann ebenfalls zu sagen, „woher[18-6] des Landes,
woher der Männer er sei.“[18-7]--„Sie sehen, ich bin Engländer, und
James ist es auch, der gute alte Junge. Der Name ist nicht
notwendig--nennen Sie mich Mr. Brown, und ich bin’s zufrieden,“ sagte
er lächelnd. „Wir sind heute Mittag gekommen durch
Salzkammergut--{{beautiful indeed}}--und konnten[18-8] nicht mehr
weiter. Aber singen Sie, meine Herren, singen Sie, ich
bitte.“--Schnell waren die Sänger zusammen, sprachen zuerst leise mit
einander und setzten plötzlich kräftig ein in die Weise:

        Treu[19-1] und herzinniglich,
        Robin Adair!
        Tausendmal grüß ich dich!
        Robin Adair!
        Hab’ ich doch[19-2] manche Nacht
        Schlummerlos zugebracht,
        Immer an dich gedacht,
        Robin Adair!

Die Verse verklangen. Der Engländer war außer sich vor Freude, als er
die heimische Weise klingen hörte. „Das ist {{beautiful}}--, aber wo
haben Sie ein ähnliches deutsches Lied?“--Die Studios besannen sich.

„Nun, singen Sie: ‚Ännchen von Tharau‘!“,[19-3][E-1] sagte die
„Institutsvorsteherin.“

„Richtig, los! eins, zwei, drei, ‚Ännchen von Tharau‘ ist’s die mir
gefällt!“ rief der zweite Tenor. Sie sangen frisch herunter:

        Ännchen von Tharau ist’s, die mir gefällt,
        Sie ist mein Leben, mein Gut und mein Geld.

        Ännchen von Tharau hat wieder ihr Herz
        Auf mich gerichtet in Freud’ und in Schmerz.

        Ännchen von Tharau, mein Reichtum, mein Gut!
        Du, meine Seele, mein Fleisch und mein Blut.

        Käm’ alles Wetter gleich auf uns zu schlahn,[19-4]
        Wir sind gesinnt, bei einander zu stahn:

        Krankheit, Verfolgung, Betrübnis und Pein
        Soll unsrer Liebe Verknotigung sein ...

„Das ist ein schönes Volkslied, das müssen Sie mir geben. Aber was
ist das „Verknotigung?““[20-1][E-2]

„Ja, wissen Sie, das ist etwas besonderes. Zum Exempel, wenn ein
Jüngling und eine Jungfrau sich so ein bißchen stark lieb haben, so
ist das „Verknotigung“. Das kommt von dem Liebesband her, und wenn
die zwei Bänder zusammenkommen und geknüpft werden, giebt’s allemal
dort eine „Verknotigung“. ‚Der Ausdruck ist obsolet,‘ sagt der
Herr Professor auf seiner Hitsche[20-2]--aber er[20-3] ist gut, sehr
gut,“ sagte der zweite Tenor.

„{{O, well, Sir}}--sehr gut! ich verstehen jetzt „Verknotigung“.
Ich lieben sehr das Volkslied[20-4] der Deutschen.“

„Holla!“ rief der zweite Tenor, „das können Sie hier[20-5] haben,
Mr. Brown, aus bester Quelle. Heda, ihr Mannsleut’, singt’s[20-6]
einmal einen Steirer![20-7] Meint Ihr denn, wir singen umsonst hier?
Jeder, wer zuhört, zahlt[20-8] einen Zwanziger Münz.[20-9] Wenn Ihr
aber selber singt, braucht’s nix zu zahlen!“

Die Leute schauten sich verdutzt an, und keiner sagte ein
Wort. Endlich brach der alte Führer das Schweigen:

„Wär’[20-10] schon völlig recht, junger Herr, aber wir Leut’ singen
halt anders als d’ Stadtleut’ und könnet’s nit gar schön. Für uns is
schon völlig schön genug, draußen auf der Almen--aber für Euch nit!“

„Ach was--Ihr singt wie’s[20-11] Euch ums Herz ist.“

„Habt Ihr denn keine Zither?“ fragte der Assessor.

„Freilich, freilich, a Zithern is schon da bein’n Tauernwirt. Johann,
der gnädige Herr will dein Zithern haben,“ rief der Alte.

Der Tauernwirt brachte sie herbei, der Assessor stimmte mit kundiger
Hand schnell das gute Instrument und spielte mit ungemeiner Fertigkeit
einen „Herzog-Maxländler“[21-1] und dann einen „Steierischen“ in
{{optima forma}}.[21-2]

Im Hintergrunde bewegten sich schon die Füße; die Leute waren
elektrisiert, und vorab der Alte mit dem Gemsbarte[21-3] zog bald das
eine, bald das andere Bein hinauf und zuckte mit[21-4] den Armen wie
ein Hampelmann, den man[21-5] an der Schnur zieht. Plötzlich
klang’s[21-6] aus dem Hintergrund:

        Und zwoa Blattln[21-7] und zwoa Bleamle
        Und a Reb’n um an Stamm,
        Und was[21-8] oanonda b’stimmt is,
        Dös find’t sich a[21-9] z’samm!

Eine helle Stimme sang’s; es war die Spinnerin. Der Assessor
begleitete sie, und bald darauf schallte es:[21-10]

        B’hüat’[21-11] dich Gott, mein kleans Dioandl,
        Es muß a so sein,
        Mein Leb’n gehört in Koasa,
        Mein Herz’l g’hört dein!

        Und mein Herzerl, dös laß ich
        Dahoam in dein Haus,
        Sonst traf’s leicht a Kugel,
        Run d’ Liab alli r’aus!“

Es[21-12] sang’s ein stämmiger Bursche. Aber der Alte warnte gleich
darauf mit dem Verse:

        „Gescheit[22-1] sein, gescheit sein,
        Nit in Oalles glei n’ein!
        Es sitzt oft a Fux
        In ’ren Pelzkappen d’rein!“

Der Engländer war außer sich vor Freude; das hatte er ja[22-2] schon
längst gewünscht zu hören, aber niemand hatte ihm den Gefallen gethan,
trotzdem er oft den Leuten Geld geboten hatte. Aber fürs[22-3] Geld
sangen sie wohl[22-4] drunten im Flachland, die nachgemachten Tyroler
in Glacéehandschuhen, aber da oben nicht. Aber jetzt waren die Leute
guter Dinge.[22-5] Die Studenten holten die Sängerin vor. Der
Engländer nahm sich[22-6] den Tauernwirt auf die Seite und redete mit
ihm. Der Rotkopf verschwand und kehrte mit etlichen Flaschen
zurück. Bald brodelte es[22-7] aufs neue in der Küche von
Kaiserschmarren, auf dem Tische aber dampfte eine prächtige
Bowle. Verschämt setzten sich die Leute aus der Hinterstube herein in
die Herrenstube und bekamen vollauf zu essen und frischen Tyroler zu
trinken, während die Studenten kunstgerecht den Punsch mit Hilfe des
Engländers zurecht machten. Alles war ein Geschenk von Mr. Brown, das
er anzunehmen bat, als Beitrag dafür,[22-8] daß er nicht singen könne.

Der Assessor spielte,[22-9] die drei Studenten sangen, die Bauern
hörten zu, und der Tauernwirt schmunzelte in der Ofenecke und freute
sich, daß heute Abend was[22-10] draufging, und segnete das
Schneetreiben, das ihm die Gäste in seine Klause gejagt.--Draußen
stürmte es noch lustig zu--aber was thut’s,[22-11] wenn

        Im Ofen hell der Kienspan blitzt,
        Und jeder warm beim andern sitzt--
        Da thut das Herz im schnellen Lauf
        Sich fröhlicher dem Herzen auf!

So war’s auch hier, die Fremden waren durchs Unwetter _eine_ Familie
geworden. Die Studenten hatten sich schnell unter die Eingebornen
gemacht,[23-1] und die kluge Elsa war ihnen nachgefolgt. Der Rotkopf
hatte sich[23-2] den Alten mit dem Gemsbart ausgewählt, den er trotz
allen Anschreiens nicht verstand. Der Engländer unterhielt sich mit
der „Vorsteherin“ im feinsten Englisch. Der Assessor aber rückte zu
dem jungen Ehepaare. Die zwei andern Mädchen zog’s[23-3] auch hinüber
zu der Else[E-3] und langsam rutschten sie an der Wand bis hinüber zu
ihr.

„Wie wär’s,[23-4] meine Herrschaften, wenn jeder von uns eine
Geschichte aus seinem Leben erzählte?[23-5] Mit dem Schlaf
wird’s[23-6] doch nicht viel werden heute Nacht, nicht wahr,
Mr. Brown, trotz Ihres hohen[23-7] Bettes, und das Stroh für Sie, mein
Fräulein,[23-8] kann warten, bis Sie sich darin verkriechen--“ sagte
plötzlich der unermüdliche zweite Tenor.

„Ach ja--das wäre[23-9] schön,“ meinten die Fräuleins;[23-10] denn sie
wußten sich geborgen, daß sie nichts zu erzählen brauchten, weil sie
noch nichts erlebt hatten.

„Wer fängt an?“ riefen sie alle.

„Wir werden den Halm ziehen?“ Sie zogen und den kürzesten zog der
junge Eheherr. Alle lachten, denn er war bis jetzt der schweigsamste
gewesen, und hatte sich nur an dem süßen Geplauder seiner Frau
erfreut.

„Nun denn, wenn es sein muß, werde ich Ihnen unsere
Hochzeitsgeschichte erzählen. Annlieschen, erschrick nicht, wenn du
dabei etliche Male vorkommst, denn sonst ist’s keine
Hochzeitsgeschichte,“ sagte er zu seiner Frau, „denn dazu gehören
immer zwei.“

„Ja, mach’s aber nur nicht zu arg, Hans.“

„Wes Zeichens[24-1] und Standes ich bin, brauchen Sie nicht zu wissen,
noch wie wir heißen. Wo wir her[24-2] sind, merken Sie vielleicht an
unsrer Sprache, die so etwas niederrheinisch[24-3] klingt. Aber wir
sind ehrlicher Leute Kind[24-4] und haben noch keine silbernen Löffel
gestohlen.--Also so war’s: Ich lebte mit einer Schwester auf einem
Dorfe und war nahe daran, ein Einsiedler zu werden. Die Schwester
wußte so gut, was _mir_ lieb war, und ich wußte, was _sie_ gerne
hatte, und so gedachte ich mein Leben still zu beschließen als
Einsiedler. Aber es[24-5] kam anders. Plötzlich kam es[24-6] wie das
Schneetreiben heute und jagte mich in den Ehestand hinein. Meine
Schwester hatte just ihr Kaffeekränzchen mit ihren Gespielinnen, in
welchem nebenbei auch gestrickt[24-7] wurde. Die Strickkörbchen
wanderten[24-8] von Kränzchen zu Kränzchen. Die Nächstfolgende nahm
die Körbchen immer mit nach Hause. Es[24-9] war die Reihe an einem
muntern, rotwangigen Mädchen. Sie nahm die Körbchen am Schluß des
Kränzchens. Es war schon spät, und ich mußte sie ehrenhalber
begleiten. Da fiel mir plötzlich ein, daß sie sich mit den Körbchen
schleppte, und ich bat: „Ach bitte, geben Sie mir doch[24-10] die
Körbchen.“[24-11] „Nein,“ sagte sie, „kein einziges.“ Da fuhr
mir’s[25-1] durch den Sinn: Jetzt oder nie!--„Ha,“ sagte
ich--„Fräulein, wirklich, Sie geben mir kein Körbchen? Dann bin ich
der glücklichste Mensch, dann geben Sie mir einen Kuß.“ Und ehe sie
sich’s versah, hatte ich ihr um die Straßenecke herum einen Kuß
gegeben. Sie weinte und lachte zugleich, und ich sagte: „Komm,[25-2]
wir wollen gleich umkehren und es der Schwester sagen.“ Wir kehrten
Arm in Arm um und stellten uns als Braut und Bräutigam vor. Die
Schwester zog mich auf die Seite und sagte: „Sieh, Hans, die[25-3]
habe ich immer gemeint. Sie hat dich auch lieb, das weiß ich.“--Und
nun sehen Sie: das ist das Annlieschen hier, meine liebwerte,
herzallerliebste Frau.“--

Alle schauten sie lachend an; aber in ihr halbverlegenes und in ihrer
Verlegenheit um[25-4] so hübscheres Angesicht brannte[25-5] plötzlich
zum Erstaunen aller--ein kräftiger Kuß. Der kam von der
„Institutsvorsteherin,“ welche die junge Frau warm umschlang. „Sie
glückliches Menschenkind!“ sagte sie. Die Studenten waren ob[25-6] Kuß
und Rede höchst verwundert. In dem zweiten Tenor stieg ein leises
Ahnen und Zweifeln auf, es[25-7] möge doch am Ende mit der
„Institutsvorsteherin“ nicht völlig seine Richtigkeit[25-8] haben,
denn das sei doch nicht nach Knigges[25-9] ‚Umgang mit Menschen‘
gehandelt und geredet. Als er ihr tief ins Angesicht schaute, ward’s
ihm noch klarer. Sie deuchte ihm wirklich schön zu sein, zu schön für
eine Pensionsmutter.[25-10]

Am meisten hatte aber der Assessor mit seiner Konfusion zu
kämpfen. Die ganze Hochzeitsgeschichte kam ihm so wunderbar vor. Auch
er blickte hinüber zu der „Institutsvorsteherin“ und konnte sich[26-1]
das[26-2] nicht mit der gehaltenen Würde eines „Pensionsdrachen“
vereinigen.

Der Eheherr aber fuhr fort: „Nun hatten wir kurze
Verlobungszeit,[26-3] denn bei mir[26-4] waren, von den Eltern her,
Kasten und Schränke voll von selbstgesponnenem Flachs und
Leinen. Meine Schwester räumte bald das Feld, denn sie selber hatte
eine alte Liebe, der sie aber nicht eher nachhängen wollte, als bis
sie mich versorgt wußte. Die Hochzeit war bald, und die Hochzeitsreise
ist es, auf der wir uns befinden. Wir wußten zuerst nicht wohin[26-5]
und kamen mit der Kutsche an einen Knotenpunkt der Eisenbahn
gefahren.[26-6] „Annlieschen,“ sag’ ich, „wo[26-7] der erste Zug jetzt
hinfährt, ob nach Norden oder Süden, da fahren wir hin.“ Annlieschen
war’s zufrieden, wie sie überhaupt mit allem zufrieden ist. Also der
Zug geht nach Süden. Wir fahren nach Kassel.[26-8] Ich sage:
„Hast[26-9] du Kassel gesehen, dann siehst du auch Frankfurt[26-10] am
Main, wo die deutschen Kaiser einst gehaust.“ Sagt[26-11] Annlieschen:
„Ja wohl--dahin laß mich mit dir, mein Geliebter, ziehen.“[26-12] Dort
regnet’s in Strömen. Wir sitzen im Westend-Hotel und sehen uns[26-13]
den Regen an. „Anneliese,“ sag’ ich, „das ist langweilig--wir
gehen[26-14] nach dem schönen Heidelberg,[26-15] da ist’s sonnig und
wonnig.“ Aber in Heidelberg, dem Wetterloch,[26-16] war’s noch
schlimmer. Sitzt[26-17] im „Ritter“[26-18] dort ein Herr, der sagt:
„Freiburg[27-1] im Breisgau--da ist’s schön, herrlich!“--und Anneliese
sagt wieder: „Dahin, dahin u.s.w.“[27-2] Ich gehe mit ihr nach
Freiburg, auf den Blauen[27-3]--„da schimmert was,“[27-4] sag’
ich. „Anneliese--guck[27-5] mal[27-6]--weißt du, was das ist?“ „Nein,“
sagt die Anneliese. „Siehste[27-7]--das[27-8] sind die Alpen.“
Anneliese sagt wieder: „Dahin laß uns ziehen.“ Wir ziehen durch die
Schweiz nach dem Sankt Gotthard,[27-9] wo wir eingeregnet werden. Da
sitzen zwei Brautpaare in gleicher Nässe, die wollten[27-10] nach
Italien. Italien! das stach[27-11] mich wie ein
Skorpion. „Annlieschen--Italien!--Land,[27-12] wo die Citronen
blühen[27-13]--dahin laß uns ziehen!“ Wir hatten zwar nichts bei uns
als einen kleinen Reisesack in der Hand zu[27-14] tragen, aber ich
sage: „Es[27-15] kennt uns niemand.“ Also nach Italien! Wir waren in
Mailand [27-16] und Genua.[27-17] Ich sage: „Annlieschen--weißt du,
was da hinten liegt am blauen Meere?“ „Nein,“ sagt sie, „wat[27-18]
soll da liegen?“ „Da liegt Rom--! Rom! Neapel--’s ist ein
Katzensprung--also „Annliese {{avanti}}!“,[27-19] womit der Italiener
so viel meint, als wenn der Deutsche „Vorwärts“ sagt. Und schließlich
standen wir auf dem Vesuv.[27-20] Von dort ging’s[27-21] rasch zurück
über Venedig[27-22] und nun hier herauf nach den Tauern, und da wurden
wir festgeschneestöbert.[27-23]--So, meine Herrschaften, nun wissen
Sie Bescheid, wen Sie vor sich haben.“

„{{Beautiful indeed}},“ sagte der Engländer. „Sie haben großes[27-24]
Mut. Ich sehr lieben Italien.“

Die drei jungen Mädchen waren vor Vergnügen außer sich, also die[28-1]
hatten Italien gesehen, während sie selbst in Venedig umkehren mußten!
Die Frau kam ihnen nun doppelt interessant vor. Sie meinten zwar, man
müßte es den Leuten immer am Gesicht ansehen, wenn sie in Italien
gewesen,[28-2] aber Anneliese sah so rotbackig drein, und ließ es sich
so vortrefflich schmecken, und sie merkten nicht das geringste
Absonderliche. Nur daß der junge Eheherr ein Spaßvogel war, der in
trockenster[28-3] Art mit dem fettesten Pinsel malte, das leuchtete
ihnen ein.

Die Studenten aber ließen die Köpfe hängen. „Ach,“ sagte der zweite
Tenor, „wenn unsereinem so etwas mal[28-4] in dem Garten[28-5] wüchse!
Da lernt man seinen Horatius[28-6] und Virgil im finstern Loch[28-7]
und sieht sein Leben[28-8] nichts davon,[28-9] nicht einmal einen
Italiener, von nahem! {{Beatus ille!“}}[28-10]

Derweilen der Studio so klagte, stimmte der Assessor die Saiten und
fing plötzlich mit schöner, tiefer Stimme das Lied zu singen an:

        Kennst[28-11] du das Land, wo die Citronen blüh’n,
        Im dunkeln Laub die Goldorangen glüh’n,
        Ein sanfter Wind vom blauen Himmel weht,
        Die Myrte still und hoch der Lorbeer steht?
              Kennst du es wohl?[28-12]
              Dahin! Dahin
        Möcht’ ich mit dir, o mein Geliebter zieh’n!

Er sang so schön und herzergreifend, daß alles[28-13] stille ward.

„Waren Sie schon in Italien?“ fragte der Engländer.

„Ja, ich war schon da, vor[29-1] Jahren,“ sagte leise und ernst der
Assessor. Er schnitt damit[29-2] aber jedes weitere Gespräch ab. Man
merkte es ihm am Tone an, daß dort etwas von Bedeutung in seinem Leben
geschehen sein mußte, womit er nicht herausrücken wollte.

„Sie haben das Lied so schön gesungen,“ sagte die „Vorsteherin“--„so
schön wie ich es nur einstens von einer Freundin gehört. Aber
merkwürdig ganz mit demselben Klange und derselben Auffassung. Es ist
doch eigen, wie plötzlich Erinnerungen auftauchen, die sich an irgend
ein Lied oder Wort oder einen Klang so unzerreißbar heften!“

„Und Ihre Freundin war auch in Italien?“ fragte der Assessor.

„Ja--sie ist ganz dort,“ entgegnete die Dame wehmütig. „Sie schläft
unter den Cypressen an der Cestiuspyramide,[29-3] auf dem Kirchhofe
der Protestanten zu Rom.“

Den Assessor durchzuckte es.[29-4] Es[29-5] kämpfte in ihm, ob er
weiter fragen sollte. Endlich fragte er doch: „In welchem Jahre war
es?“

„Es war im[29-6] Jahre 18.., am 20. Mai, daß sie entschlafen.“

Der Assessor stützte den Kopf in beide Hände und sprach kein
Wort. Alle schauten still und stumm auf ihn,--am meisten betroffen
aber war die „Vorsteherin.“ „Ich habe Ihnen doch[29-7] nicht wehe
gethan?“ sagte sie in weichem, mildem Tone.

Der Assessor schaute sie klar und tief mit feuchten Augen an. „Wohl
und wehe zugleich, Fräulein Milla!--denn keine andere sind Sie,
wiewohl ich Sie nie gesehen, die treueste Freundin meiner
unvergeßlichen Elsa.“--Er reichte ihr die Hand und hielt sie lange
fest.

Nun aber war das Erstaunen an ihr. Ihr Auge leuchtete und eine
durchsichtige Röte flammte über die schönen Züge. „Sie sind es,
Robert?--Und so sehen wir uns[30-1] zum ersten Mal in diesem Leben?“

Die andern im Kreise schwiegen. Jeder ehrte den Schmerz, den er doch
nicht völlig verstand.

„Sehr merkwürdig,“ sagte der Engländer leise zu den andern. „Bitte,
singen Sie ein Lied, das ist das beste für die Wunden.“ Schnell waren
die drei Studenten beisammen und sangen mit heller Stimme:

        Es[30-2] ist bestimmt in Gottes Rat,
        Daß man vom liebsten, das man hat,
          Muß scheiden;
        Wiewohl doch nichts im Lauf der Welt
        Dem Herzen, ach! so sauer fällt
          Als scheiden.

Als sie geschlossen, stand der Assessor auf, drückte jedem die Hand
und sagte: „Ich danke Ihnen von Herzen. Vergeben Sie mir den
Augenblick, wo ich mich verloren habe und Ihnen vielleicht schwach
erschienen bin.“ Die „Vorsteherin“ war noch immer still in sich
versunken. Endlich brach der Assessor wieder das Schweigen.

„Da Sie so unvermutet Zeugen einer gemeinsamen Erinnerung geworden, so
lassen Sie mich Ihnen auch mitteilen, was wir erlebt. Ich darf wohl
kurz sein: Es war in meinen Universitätsjahren. Ich war wie Sie, meine
Herren, ein fröhlicher Bursche, dem der Himmel voll Baßgeigen[31-1]
hing. Wir sangen auch, wie Sie, Quartette und weckten die Leute des
Morgens[31-2] in der Ruhe und des Abends im Schlaf mit unserm
Gesang. Da wurden wir eines Tages gebeten, auf einer Hochzeit zu
erscheinen und dem jungen Paare zu singen, dafür[31-3] sollten wir
dann auch mitfeiern. Was thut man nicht als Student, um ein gut Glas
Wein zu erjagen? Wir sangen und mischten uns unter die Gäste, die aus
allen Himmelsgegenden zusammengeflogen waren. Wir Studenten kamen
unter die Brautjungfern zu sitzen. Ich ahnte nicht, daß das die
Wendung meines ganzen Lebens werden sollte.[31-4] Wir scherzten und
sangen; aber mit meiner Nachbarin geriet ich sehr bald ins tiefste
Gespräch. Ich hörte und sah nichts mehr als nur sie. Noch nie hatte
ein Mensch im[31-5] Leben so schnell mich verstanden, und so
seelenvoll mit mir verkehrt. Ich war ja[31-6] ein Waisenkind, bei
fremden Leuten auferzogen, ohne Geschwister, und hatte nie gewußt, was
eigentlich ein fühlendes Herz sei. Die Kameraden hatten mich
wohl[31-7] aus meiner Philisterhaftigkeit und Menschenscheu
herausgejagt, aber Zutrauen zu Menschen hatte ich nicht gefaßt. Aber
dies Mädchen mit ihrer weichen Stimme, ihren seelenvollen Augen und
den geistvollen, blitzenden und doch so warm leuchtenden Gedanken
hatte mir eine Welt aufgeschlossen, die ich nicht kannte. Ich wagte
es,[32-1] ihr von meinem traurigen Leben zu erzählen. Ich weiß nicht,
was ich noch alles sagte, mir brannte der Kopf und der Boden unter den
Füßen. „Wenn sie nur meine Schwester wäre,“[32-2] so dachte ich und
sprach es ihr auch aus. Sie schaute mich dabei mit einem wunderbaren
Blicke an. Da begann eben der Tanz, ihre Mutter holte sie weg, und sie
verlor sich[32-3] in den Reihen der Tanzenden. Ich konnte nicht
tanzen, aber das Bild verlor sich nicht, ich mußte sie immer mit den
Augen verfolgen. Mit einem Male war sie fort,[32-4] verschwunden mit
ihrer Mutter. Ich hörte, daß sie plötzlich erkrankt sei. Nach dem
Tanze mußten wir noch singen; aber ich sang verkehrt, und wir warfen
beinahe um. Als die Sache zu Ende war, schlich ich still unter das
Fenster des Gasthofes, in welchem sie wohnte; es[32-5] war noch Licht
oben. Sie war krank, und ich dachte mir gleich das schlimmste. Am
folgenden Tage hörte ich, daß sie wirklich schwer vom Typhus erfaßt
sei, der wohl in ihr gelegen und den die Aufregung der Hochzeit
beschleunigt hatte. Wochen kamen und gingen. Endlich durfte[32-6] sie
wieder ins Freie. Wir Studenten benutzten den ersten Abend ihrer
Genesung, ihr ein Ständchen zu bringen. Stille öffneten sich die
Fenster in der lauen Nacht, und unser Gesang tönte hinauf. Die Mutter
lud uns mit der Familie, die damals Hochzeit feierte, bald darauf
ein. Ich sah Elsa wieder, die Züge waren unverändert, nur die leichte
Röte ihrer Wangen erschreckte mich und der starke Glanz in den
Augen. Sie reichte mir die Hand und sagte: „Sie haben gewiß das
Ständchen mir gebracht.“ Ich wurde rot bis über die Ohren und
gestand. Ich sagte noch mehr; ich sagte, wie ich um sie gelitten
während dieser Zeit und jeden[33-1] Abend stundenlang unten an der
Ecke gestanden, um zu sehen, ob das Licht noch brenne.“

„Ja, ja,“ sagte sie, „ich war selbst ein brennend[33-2] Licht, das
hin-[33-3] und herflackerte zwischen Leben und Tod. Merkwürdig! Ihre
Lebensgeschichte hat mich oft in den[33-4] Fieberphantasieen verfolgt;
ich sprach immer von einem Waisenknaben, der mich gebeten hätte,[33-5]
seine Schwester zu sein. Mutter fragte mich manchmal, wer es denn
sei,[33-6] aber ich kannte Ihren Namen nicht. Ich habe aber von einer
Freundin gehört, die mir erzählte, wie einer von den Sängern jeden Tag
da unten gestanden und hinaufgeschaut. Ich dachte, das ist gewiß der
„Bruder.“

„Es[33-7] flocht sich seit jener Zeit ein inniges Freundschaftsband
zwischen uns. Nach ihrer Genesung zog sie mit der Mutter weit weg,
aber ich durfte mit ihr korrespondieren. Ich lernte nun mit eisernem
Fleiß, um meine Studien[33-8] zu vollenden. Ich war nicht unbemittelt,
und wenn alles gut ging, so konnte ich ihr nach drei Jahren ein Heim
bieten. So arbeitete ich fast über meine Kräfte bei Tag und
Nacht. Mein Trost waren Elsas Briefe. Plötzlich blieben diese aus. Ich
bekam keine Antwort mehr. Auf meine dringenden Bitten an die Mutter
schrieb diese endlich, „der Gesundheitszustand Elsas sei derart,[34-1]
daß sie jede Aufregung vermeiden müsse.“ Das[34-2] warf mich vollends
nieder. Ich war ohnehin schon durch übernächtige Arbeiten erschüttert,
aber das gab mir den letzten Stoß. Wochenlang lag ich zwischen Leben
und Tod. Als ein alter Mensch bin ich vom Bette aufgestanden, da fand
ich zwei Briefe--von der Hand dieses Fräuleins hier, einer nahen
Freundin Elsas, die[34-3] mir Aufschluß gaben. Die Mutter hatte
nämlich ihr und ihres Kindes Vermögen bei einem Bankhause verloren.
In ihrer Not wandte sie sich an einen Onkel Elsas, der eben so alt wie
reich war. Er half auch, aber ließ allmählich seine Absicht auf die
Hand Elsas merken. Als er deutlicher damit hervortrat, wehrte sie sich
aufs[34-4] entschiedenste. Die Mutter sah mit gramvollem[34-5] Herzen
der Sache zu. Vor Elsa stand die Möglichkeit, durch die reiche Heirat
der Mutter zu helfen. Sie liebte mich--aber es deuchte ihr zu lange,
bis ich ihr ein Heim bieten könnte, und überhaupt--ich hatte ja doch
bisher nur wie ein Bruder zu ihr gestanden. Die Mutter hatte dem Onkel
das Geheimnis unserer Liebe unbedacht verraten, und er verbot, als
Bedingung seiner weiteren Hilfe, jedes weitere Korrespondieren mit dem
jungen Manne. Elsa hatte mir dies durch ihre Freundin schreiben lassen
und wartete auf Antwort. Da eben erkrankte ich, und alle meine Briefe
blieben uneröffnet bis zu meiner Genesung. Ich öffnete den zweiten
Brief, dessen kurzer Inhalt war: Elsa konnte mein Schweigen nicht
anders auslegen, als daß ich sie vergessen. Aber sie blieb dennoch
fest und standhaft und wollte lieber alle Mittel des Onkels
ausschlagen, als einem Manne die Hand geben, den sie nicht liebte. So
arbeitete sie denn die Nächte durch,[35-1] um ihre Mutter und sich zu
erhalten. Aber die zarte Gesundheit fing an zu wanken: der Typhus
hatte damals doch eine krankhafte Reizbarkeit der Lunge[35-2]
zurückgelassen, die[35-3] jetzt wieder aufs neue sich Bahn brach.
Nach dem Lesen der Briefe wäre[35-4] ich fast wieder in Krankheit
gesunken, aber es galt ein anderes Leben als das meinige. Ich schrieb
der Freundin, mein Vermögen stehe zur Verfügung und schickte sofort
eine Summe, um Elsa und ihre Mutter zum Aufenthalte im Süden zu
bewegen. Meine Staatsprüfung machte ich halb krank und begehrte nach
meiner Anstellung sofort Urlaub, der mir aber verweigert wurde. Ich
hielt bei der Mutter um die Hand Elsas an, die derweilen nach
Nizza[35-5] gegangen. Elsa schrieb die glücklichsten Briefe, ihre
Gesundheit stärkte sich von Tag zu Tage. Ich hatte mir endlich Urlaub
beim Minister erwirkt. Elsa war nach Florenz[35-6] gegangen, in Rom
wollten wir uns treffen. Ich eilte über die Alpen, kam in Rom an und
flog zum „Hotel Minerva“. Das Stubenmädchen, das[35-7] mich melden
sollte, schaute mich groß[35-8] an und sagte: „Sind Sie ein Doktor?
Signora[35-9] ist sehr krank, o sehr krank!“ Ich öffnete bebenden
Herzens[35-10] die Thüre. Ein Nachtlicht brannte durch die dämmerige
Stube. „Ist Robert noch nicht da?“[35-11] hörte ich eine weiche,
sanfte Stimme fragen. Ich fühlte mein Herz hörbar schlagen und winkte
der Mutter. „O er ist gewiß da, ich fühl’ es,“ sagte die Kranke. So
trat ich ans Bett. Ja, da lag sie, eine sterbende Blume. Tags zuvor
hatte sie einen heftigen Blutsturz gehabt, der ihr die letzte Kraft
nahm.--Erlassen Sie mir, das Wiedersehen zu beschreiben. Elsas Leben
flammte noch einmal auf. Sie hatte sich soweit erholt, daß sie mit uns
vor die Thore Roms fahren konnte. Wir kamen an der Cestiuspyramide am
{{Monte Testaccio}}[36-1] vorbei. „Eine Pyramide,“ rief sie
leuchtend,[36-2] „laß uns zur Pyramide fahren!“ Wir bogen ein. Es war
schon Abend. „Ach da ist ja ein Kirchhof,“ sagte sie leise. „Wer wird
da begraben unter diesen schönen Cypressen?“--„Die deutschen[36-3]
Ketzer,“ sagte unser Vetturin, „die nicht an Madonna glauben.“ Elsa
war still geworden. Ich wickelte sie fester in den Plaid, da es sehr
kalt wurde. Wir fuhren nach dem Gasthof. In der Nacht überfiel sie
ein zweiter Blutsturz, sie schaute mich mit einem großen, langen Blick
an, dann umschlang sie meinen Hals und sagte: „Leb wohl, mein guter
Bruder, mein--“ da stockte ihr Atem, das Leben war entflohen.“

Nach einer Weile fuhr der Assessor fort: „Zwei Tage darauf haben wir
sie unter den Cypressen dort begraben, sie--und mein Leben mit
ihr. Achtzehn Jahre sind darüber hin.[36-4]--Ich habe mich fern vom
Treiben der Menschen still in den bayrischen Wald geflüchtet und über
der Arbeit wohl[36-5] mich, aber nicht meine Elsa vergessen. Der
Aktenstaub hat sich mir übers Herz gelagert, und ich bin nachgerade
beim philisterhaften Junggesellen angelangt. Mir[37-1] ist aber, als
wäre ich heute von einem langen Schlafe und schweren Traume
erwacht. Fräulein Milla, Sie sind schuld, und Sie, meine Herren, mit
ihren Liedern. Wissen Sie, wohin ich möchte?[37-2] Nach Rom zur
Cestiuspyramide; nur eine[37-3] Stunde will ich dort unter den
Cypressen ruhen und dann wieder heim[37-4] zum Landgericht in meine
Klause und zu der alten Lena, die so oft die Pyramide im Bilde
beschaut und mich fragt, ob das auch eine Kirche sei.“--

Der Assessor schwieg. Der treuherzige, zweite Tenor schlang den Arm um
ihn und sagte ihm als Trost ins Ohr: „Ich bin auch ein Waisenkind!“

Fräulein Milla, die „Vorsteherin“, war noch ganz in ihre Gedanken
verloren, die Vergangenheit zog an ihr vorüber. Sie hatte die
Todesnachricht ihrer Freundin von Roberts Hand empfangen, dann aber
nichts mehr gehört, da die Mutter Elsas aus Gram ihre Tochter nicht
lange überlebte.

Das Reden wurde ihr[37-5] offenbar schwer. Zuletzt aber faßte sie sich
und sagte: „Finden Sie keine Ähnlichkeit unter diesen Mädchen mit
Ihrer Elsa? Schauen Sie sie[37-6] einmal[37-7] recht[37-8] an!“

Der Assessor sagte: „Ja, die eine fiel mir schon lange auf, aber ich
traute doch nicht ganz meinem Urteil.“

„Nun ja, sie sind nicht aus der Art geschlagen. Sie wissen, daß Elsa
einen Bruder hatte, der nach dem Tode der Mutter in unserm Hause
erzogen wurde. Er heiratete später meine jüngste Schwester, und
das [37-9] sind ihre Kinder. Sie hielten mich wohl[38-1] alle, meine
Herren, für eine gestrenge Institutsdame! Ich bin es nicht, wir haben
uns nur fremden Leuten gegenüber die Maske auferlegt, um unbelästigt
durchzukommen. Ich bin die Tante der Kinder.“

Jetzt ging auch den Studios ein Licht[38-2] auf, und sie begriffen die
heitere[38-3] „Vorsteherin“. Es war derweilen Mitternacht
geworden. Der Engländer saß tief versunken da. Die Geschichte hatte
ihn wunderbar getroffen, er redete kein Wort mehr, sondern stand auf
und verbeugte sich artig gegen die Damen, schüttelte aber dem Assessor
warm die Hand, als wäre er sein bester Freund. Den Studenten dankte er
für den Gesang und rief seinen James.

„James--du räumst[38-4] unsere Stube aus, daß die Damen da schlafen
können. Wir werden das Stroh suchen.“

Trotz aller Gegenvorstellungen von Seiten Fräulein Millas
blieb’s[38-5] dabei.

Die Eingeborenen hatten schon längst ihr Lager gesucht.

Draußen war’s stille geworden, das Schneetreiben hatte sich gelegt.

Die Studenten schliefen bald den gesunden Jugendschlaf, aber der
Assessor blickte noch lange hinaus in die mondhelle, glänzende Nacht
und über das große Leichentuch, das der Schnee über die Matten und
Bergspitzen geworfen.

   *   *   *   *   *

Der Tag graute. Die Führer waren früh auf, um dem Wetter nachzuspüren
und den Schnee zu prüfen. Mit einiger Vorsicht konnte man es schon
wagen, weiter zu ziehen. Der Assessor war schon munter und wartete auf
Fräulein Milla, sie hatten sich[39-1] ja noch so viel zu sagen! Milla
erschloß ihr Herz dem vereinsamten Freunde ihrer Elsa, und ihm
war[39-2] es, wie wenn ein lang verhaltener Strom endlich sich Bahn
brechen durfte.

Die Studenten zählten indessen „die Häupter[39-3] ihrer Lieben,“
d. h.[39-4] ihre Gulden und Kreuzer und addierten und subtrahierten
die Zeche. Da trat auch der Engländer herein. Die drei grüßten ihn
freundlich.

„Nun wohin?“[39-5]--fragte er.

„Wohin?--heim, wo wir hergekommen. Wir werden noch ein Konzert
veranstalten, ehe wir diesen Platz verlassen.“

„O nein,“ sagte der Engländer, „Sie sollen nicht heim, Sie sollen
sehen Italien mit mir, wenn Sie wollen, und mir dann und wann ein Lied
singen.“

Die Studenten wußten nicht, wie ihnen geschah.

„Mr. Brown,“ sagte der zweite Tenor, „das ist sehr edel von Ihnen,
aber zu teuer für Sie, denn wir sind allesamt mit einem guten Magen
behaftet.“

„Das ist gerade sehr schön, das liebt Mr. Brown sehr. Ich gehe nach
Oberitalien,[39-6] und Sie begleiten mich, und James und wir werden
viele Freude haben. Topp--eingeschlagen!“[39-7]

Die drei schlugen herzhaft ein. Über das schöne Gesicht des Engländers
zog ein Schimmer der Verklärung. So hatten sie ihn noch nicht gesehen.

Die Führer mahnten zum Aufbruch. Der alte Gemsbart[40-1] nahm das
Ränzel des Assessors.

Der junge Eheherr zog mit seiner Frau und den Damen abwärts der Ebene
zu,[40-2] die andern hinab nach Italien. Man hatte sich gegenseitig
die Namen und Adressen mitgeteilt, und alle schieden, indem[40-3] sie
das Schneetreiben segneten, das sie zusammengeweht. Der Tauernwirt
sandte allen noch einen hellen Juchzer nach, denn Mr. Brown hatte ihm
seinen[40-4] guten Kaiser Franz Joseph[40-5] in Gold als Extrageschenk
zurückgelassen. -- -- --

   *   *   *   *   *

Der Verfasser könnte nun hier schließen, aber die geneigte Leserin ist
neugierig, und möchte für ihr Leben[40-6] gern wissen, wie das
schließlich noch geendet hat. Darum will er noch ein paar Worte
hinzufügen:

An einem schönen Tag, das Jahr darauf, klopft’s[40-7] am Niederrhein
bei[40-8] dem jungen Eheherrn, als er gerade seinen kleinen Schreihals
herumtrug. „Annlies! {{avanti!}}“ riefen draußen zwei Stimmen. Dem
Eheherrn wird’s[40-9] ganz italienisch zu Mut, und er ruft: „{{Entrate
pure!}}“[40-10]--d. h. „als[40-11] herein!“ Da stehen zwei vor ihm
und schauen ihn an. „Nun--wer sind wir?“ fragen sie.

Der Eheherr aber rief in die Küche: „Annlies! {{avanti!}}“--ein
Hochzeitspaar!“ „Milla!“ rief die junge Frau--„seid[41-1] Ihr’s?“ Ja,
da standen sie, der Assessor und seine Frau. Sie waren auf der
Hochzeitsreise und wollten[41-2] zur Cestiuspyramide.

Der Assessor war damals bald umgekehrt, denn ihn trieb ein anderer
Gedanke nach Hause. Er war durch jenen Abend dem Leben zurückgegeben
und hatte Milla seine Hand gereicht. Alles wanderte[41-3] fort,
Blasenpflaster, Opodeldoc und Storchfetttopf, und Milla sah aus,
wie[41-4] wenn sie eben in die Zwanzig gekommen. Was die alte Lena
dazu gesagt, wird billig verschwiegen.--

Der zweite Tenor ist[41-5] schon lange ein würdiger Pfarrherr. In
seinem Hause ist’s[41-6] behaglich englisch[41-7] eingerichtet. Am
Abend brummt der Theekessel, und der Pfarrherr raucht vom
feinsten[41-8] dazu.[41-9] Zu seiner Seite sitzt ein munteres Weibchen
immer vergnügt und heiter;--sie heißt Elsa mit Vornamen, die kluge
unter den drei Schwestern. Bei ihrer Hochzeit war Mr. Brown der
Brautführer und Milla die Brautmutter. Die andern zwei Studenten waren
die Ehrgesellen dabei, und der Assessor, der längst schon ein
angesehener Landgerichtsrat ist, gab ihnen den Rat, seinem[41-10]
Beispiele baldigst zu folgen. An der Hochzeitstafel klang[41-11]
„Ännchen von Tharau“ noch einmal; aber Mr. Brown wußte jetzt, was
„Verknotigung“ war.




NOTES


=Page 1.=--1-1. {da =einen,[E-4]=} used as accusative of the
indeclinable indefinite personal pronoun {man}, _one_, _them_;
trans. idiomatically by changing to passive construction, _when they_
(i.e. university-students) are overburdened neither by learning nor by
the contents of their pocketbooks.

1-2. {=Er´langen=}, town and university of Bavaria, far-famed for its
divinity school. Note the difference of accentuation between
{Er´langen} and {erla´ngen} (to get, to obtain).

1-3. {=ob ... sei=}, subjunctive of dependent question, narrated
indirectly, the tense remaining the same as would be used when stated
directly: {„Ist die Welt wirklich so rund?“} being the direct
question.

1-4. {der =Herr= Professor}. {Herr} (and {Frau}) added to titles are
not translated.

1-5. {=es=} (introductory), _there_.

1-6. {=ihrer=} (partitive genitive), _of them_.

1-7. {=so= verschieden sie =auch= waren ...}, _however much_ they
differed from one another ...

1-8. {in =einem=} (numeral, therefore with emphasis) = {in _einem_
Punkte}, _in one respect_.

1-9. {=des Basses Grundgewalt=}, _the full_ (fundamental) _power of
the bass_, a quotation from Goethe’s „Faust,“ I, 2085-86:

        {Wenn das Gewölbe widerschallt,
        Fühlt man erst recht _des Basses Grundgewalt_.}

        When the vault echoes to the song,
        One first perceives the bass is deep and strong.
                                         (_Bayard Taylor._)

1-10. {=„wassergeprüft,“=} a literal but unidiomatic translation of
the English cognate =“waterproof,”= humorously for {„wasserdicht“}
(Engl. cognate: “watertight”).

1-11. {=Nichte=}, (in students’ language) for {_Geliebte_}, _the
adored one_; _love_; _sweetheart_.

1-12. =“Hotel du Lac”= (French = _“Lake Hotel”_--the French form to be
retained in translation), a humorous allusion to the large hotels of
the lakes of Switzerland, first-class in appointments and charges,
which as a rule bear French names, while the less expensive
stopping-places have such old-fashioned and unpretentious names as
“The Bear Inn,” “The Ox Inn,” etc.


=Page 2.=--2-1. {=hat man ...=}, conditional inversion = {wenn man ...
hat}.

2-2. {=nichts=} = {kein Geld}.

2-3. {=so=} (here = {dann}) {=wird=}, _then the order will be_ or _the
order is given:_

2-4. {=die Gassen, in welchen es noch etwas zu zahlen gab=}, _the
streets where they owed money_--the idea being: On their way to the
railroad-station, the three students wisely evaded such streets where
they owed money, fearing that, being seen there, by the heart-rending
entreaties of their creditors they might be induced to spend part or
all of their travelling money in settling old debts.

2-5. {=Nr.=} stands for {Nummer}.

2-6. {=Bä´deker=} ({Karl}) of Leipzig, and =Murray= (John) of London,
well-known editors and publishers, the first named of a German and the
other of an English set of guide-books, both uniformly bound in red
cloth.

2-7. {=daran´=}, refers back to the contents of the preceding
sentence, _from doing so_.

2-8. {=das=} ({der}) {=Barome´ter=}, note the accent.

2-9. The question {=„Wie viel Uhr hat es geschlagen?“=} (_“What time
is it?”_) humorously used for {„Wie steht es mit dem Wetter?“} or
{„Wie sieht es mit dem Wetter aus?“} (_“What are the
weather-prospects?”_)

2-10. {=geschlagen.=} Note the omission of the auxiliary verb in
„dependent“ clauses.

2-11. {=wir reisen=}, present tense for future, as frequently in
German.

2-12. {=du wirst ... packen=}, the future sometimes used for an
emphatic imperative.


=Page 3.=--3-1. {=auf=} (time, prospectively), _for ..._

3-2. {=das andere findet sich=} (phrase), _the rest will come of
itself_.

3-3. {=der alte=} (= {derselbe, der gleiche}), _as of old_.

3-4. {=es=} (indefinite), here for {die Reise} or {wir}.

3-5. {=Dover=}, seaport in the county of Kent (England), on the Strait
of Dover, and on one of the main lines between London and the
Continent.

3-6. {=es=}, refers to {Töchterlein}; agreement with grammatical
gender; {sie} would also be correct.

3-7. {=ihren Blicken=}, privative sense of dative--_from her eyes_.

3-8. {=geht’s=} = {geht =es=}, cf. Note 4, above.

3-9. {=Sandhase=} (=sandhare=), humorously applied to a native of a
flat and sandy district, such as are found in the farthest northwest
of Germany.


=Page 4.=--4-1. {=schon=} (adverb. idiom), difficult to render into
English, here perhaps: _readily_ or _unhesitatingly_.

4-2. {=es ist mir ... zu Mut=} (one of the many impersonal phrases),
_I feel_.

4-3. ({sag´}) {=nur=} (adverb. idiom), with an imperative: _just_
tell, or _do_ tell!

4-4. {=es=} (introductory) {=giebt=}, _there is_.

4-5. {=bescheiden=}, _modestly_, _unassumingly_. Note the sly irony.

4-6. {=Buchau=}, a fictitious name; {=der bayrische Wald=} (“_the
Bavarian Forest_”), a wooded mountain-range in Eastern Bavaria.

4-7. Distinguish between {_lange_} (adj.) {Jahre} and {Jahre =lang=}
(adv.) _for years_.

4-8. {=stiller Mondschein=} (=still moonshine=), familiarly and
jocosely for „_slight baldness_.“

4-9. {=das bayrische Wappen=}. _The shield of arms of_ (the kingdom
of) _Bavaria_ is supported by _two_ fiercely looking _lions_, and
contains a smaller center-shield (“inescutcheon”) which shows a field
of forty-two rhomb-shaped parts (“lozenges”) of alternately blue and
white tincture. For the latter the wit and the satire of the masses
have found the designation “_blue and white cuts of bread_.”

4-10. {=ins= Gesicht} (idiom, the definite article for the
possess. pronoun), = {in _sein_ Gesicht.}--The meaning is: The cares
of official life had gradually taken from him all his individuality,
so that he looked now as grim as the lions which support the shield of
arms of Bavaria, and his face, wrinkled and furrowed, resembled the
center-shield with its many cracks and zigzags.

4-11. {=nicht übel=} (_not bad_, _not amiss_), two negatives take the
place of a strong affirmation, _very fine-looking_.

4-12. {=wanderte=} (=wandered=). Note the rhetorical figure of
„personification“ consisting in representing inanimate objects as
endowed with life and action, an idiom not infrequently employed,
mainly as a substitute for the passive voice which is less used in
German than in English--_was put_ or _packed_.

4-13. {der} {=Opodel´doc=} (or {Opodeldok}), a liniment consisting of
a solution of soap in alcohol, with the addition of camphor and
essential oils--_opodeldoc_.


=Page 5.=--5-1. {der} {=Gemsbart=} or {Gamsbart} (=chamois-beard=), a
name given to the bristles cut from the back of the chamois, when
arranged in rosette style and worn as a kind of trophy by
chamois-hunters on the left side of their Alpine hats.

5-2. {=elegant´=}, note the accent.

5-3. {=sei=} (indirect subj.), _was_ (as she thought).

5-4. {=nicht ganz bei Trost sein=} (colloq. phrase), _not to be in
one’s right mind_, or _to be slightly cracked_.

5-5. {=mit der Krone und dem „L“=} _with the small silver-crown_ (a
badge fastened to the caps of government-officials) _and beneath it
the letter “L”_ (standing for {Landgericht} = Provincial Court of
Justice).

5-6. {=wäre=}, conditional subj. after {als, als ob, als wenn, wie
wenn}.

5-7. {=ihr=} (dat.), to her = _in her opinion_.

5-8. {=Mensch=}, here: _common mortal_, humorously in contrast to
{Beamter} (office-holder).

5-9. {=vor sich=} or {vor sich hin} (a phrase), _as to herself_.

5-10. {=als=} (southern dialect = {alles} or {allzeit}) for {immer},
_always_.

5-11. {=es= geht fort}, cf. Page 3, Note 4.

5-12. {ich =muß fort=}. The infinitive of a verb of motion, as {gehen}
or {reisen}, being implied, an idiom often met with after the modal
auxiliaries {müssen, können, sollen, wollen, dürfen}, and sometimes
after {lassen}.


=Page 6.=--6-1. {unsern =gnädigen= Herrn;} the adj. expresses
submission, trans. perhaps: _our most honorable judge_.

6-2. {=der himmelblaue Postillon=}. In the era of stage-coaches, the
_drivers of hackneys_ on the royal post-lines of Bavaria wore _light
blue_ uniforms.

6-3. {=allerseits=}, _to each and every one of the party_, a
stereotyped phrase used without discrimination whether there is only
one passenger in the stage or more.

6-4. {=Stutt´gart=}, capital of Württemberg, one of the three states
of Southern Germany.

6-5. {=wer ... dem=} (nominat. {der}), correlat. pron., _to any one
who ..._

6-6. {=denen=} (emphat.) = {denjenigen}, _those_.

6-7. {=wenn=} (indef.), expressing repeated action (= {so oft als}),
_when, whenever_.

6-8. {aus =den= Augen} cf. Page 4, Note 10.

6-9. {=dem Schulszepter=}, cf. Page 3, Note 7.

6-10. {=wären=} (condit. subj.) {=gereist=} for conditional {würden
... gereist sein}.

6-11. {=wenn=}, cf. Note 7, above.


=Page 7.=--7-1. {=es=} (indef.), trans. perhaps: _an expression of
happiness_, or _a gleam of joy_.

7-2. {=dächte=}, cf. Page 5, Note 6.

7-3. {=einem=} (emphat.[E-5]), cf. Page 1. Note 8.

7-4. das {=Salz´kammergut=} (lit. “Saltexchequer Property,” from its
rich salt-springs and mines), one of the most picturesque districts of
Europe (“The Austrian Switzerland”), lies between the Austrian
crown-lands of Salzburg on the West, and Styria on the East.

7-5. {=die Tauern=} or {die hohen Tauern}, a lofty mountain-range in
Tyrol and on the borders of Salzburg and Carinthia, forming the
easternmost division of the Alps.

7-6. {=Kärnthen=}, _Carinthia_, a crown-land of the Austrian empire;
the capital is Klagenfurt.

7-7. {=wollten zurück=}, cf. Page 5, Note 12.

7-8. {=Werfen--Lend=}, two villages on the old post-road from Salzburg
to Gastein, since 1875 stations on the Salzburg-Tyrol Railroad
(“Gisela R. R.”).

7-9. {=so=} (emphat.) = {dergestalt, in einer solchen Weise}.

7-10. {=das=} (emphat. = {dies, dieses}) refers back to the words
{„die Studenten waren ... bekannt geworden.“}

7-11. {=der eine=} (idiom.), _one of them_.

7-12. {wer ... =wohl=} (adverb idiom.), _I wonder_ who ...

7-13. {=ward=}, obsolescent for {wurde}.

7-14. {=bei seiner Flatterhaftigkeit=}. Note the pun.


=Page 8.=--8-1. ({mir wird wohl} =) {=es= wird mir wohl} or {=es= wird
mir wohl zu Mut}, _I_ (begin to) _feel happy_; cf. Page 4, Note 2.

8-2. {=was=} (colloq. and in poetry) for {etwas}.

8-3. {=fehlgetroffen=}, _p.p._ (lit., missed the mark), the
perf. partic. used elliptically in exclamations, trans.: _entirely
mistaken!_ or _quite out!_

8-4. {=Ihr=} (as pers. pron. of address used in earlier language and
in poetry) = modern {Sie}; {=Herr´n=}, _pl._ = {Herren, meine Herren!}

8-5. {=gefiel´=} (= {gefiele}), condit. subj. for conditional {würde
... gefallen}.

8-6. {=Ist nur ... beschert=}, cf. Page 2, Note 1.

8-7. {=den Studenten=}, cf. Page 3, Note 7.

8-8. {=die frischen Studentenlieder=}. “The German students have a
superb collection of songs in their ‘Commersbuch,’ some of which are
known to Americans through Longfellow’s [and Chas. G. Leland’s]
charming translations. Many of the songs are quite old; others bear
the names of the most famous poets of Germany.”--James M. Hart in
“German Universities.”


=Page 9.=--9-1. {die =Gastein=}, _the valley of the Gasteiner “Ache”_
(Lat. AQUA), the latter being a tributary of the Salzach. In this
valley, far-famed for its picturesque scenery, is situated “Wildbad
Gastein,” one of the most fashionable mountain-resorts. (Latin saying:
“Gastuna--semper una” = {„Es giebt nur _ein_--Gastein.“}) From the
village of Lend the entrance to the Gastein Valley is made through
{die =Klamm=} ({der Klammpaß}), _a profound and somber gorge_ in the
limestone-rock, through which the river has forced a passage.

9-2. {=Zell am See=}, a village officially known as {Zell am
Zellersee}.

9-3. {=das Pinz´gau=} (commonly pronounced and sometimes spelled
{„Pintschgau“}), a name given to a district in the crown-land of
Salzburg comprising the longitudinal valley of the river Salzach
together with its northern and southern lateral valleys.

9-4. {=auf ... zu=}, _up to_, or {zu} may be taken as prefix of
compound {zu´schreiten}.

9-5. {sich entschuldigen =über=}, a rather uncommon construction for
{sich entschuldigen =wegen=}.

9-6. {=sich=} (reciproc. pronoun), _each other_ or _one another_.

9-7. {=sich=} (reciproc. pron.), here: _from one another_.

9-8. {=sich=} (reciproc. pron.), here: _to one another, mutually_.

9-9. {=eins=} (unaccentuated, substantively) {=singen=}, familiarly
for {ein Lied singen}; comp. {_eins_} (a glass) {trinken}; {_eins_} (a
game of cards) {spielen}, {jemandem _eins_} (a blow) {versetzen}, etc.

9-10. {der =Paster´zengletscher=}, _Pasterze-Glacier_, in the Tauern
Mountains, seven miles in length, the largest glacier in the Eastern
Alps. The river Pasterze takes its rise there.

9-11. {das =Fuscherthal=}, _Valley of the_ (river) _Fusch_, in the
Tauern Mountains.

9-12. {=in verwittertem Lodenkittel=}, in English with indef. article.


=Page 10.=--10-1. {=sich=} (dat.) {von der Stirn} (idiom., dat. of
pers. pron. for possess.) = {von _seiner_ Stirn}.

10-2. {=wollte=}, mood? why? cf. Page 5, Note 6.

10-3. ({hast} ...) {=lassen=} (infinitive) for {gelassen}
(perf. partic.) idiom., with the modal auxiliaries; {du hast dich
locken lassen} (reflexive form in a passive sense as frequently), _you
could be induced to ..._

10-4. {=du hättest=} (potential subj.) {=auch=}, _you might just as
well have ..._

10-5. {=war zu machen=}, the auxil. {sein} with {zu} and the
infinitive is always used in a passive sense, _could be done_.

10-6. {=daß nit=} (dialect.) for {daß Sie nicht}.

10-7. {=Ihr=}, _you_, sometimes used in addressing people of the rural
districts, implies neither the familiarity of {Du}, nor the formality
of {Sie}.

10-8. {=unsereins, was=} (indef. neuter for masc. and femin.) =
{unsereiner, der}.

10-9. ({=brächt´s=} =) {brächte es}, condit. subj. State the form of
the conditional.

10-10. {=habe=}--mood? why? cf. Page 5, Note 3.

10-11. {=doch=} (adverb, idiom.), _besides; after all; you know_.

10-12. {=das Tauernhaus=}, _“The Summit House” in the Tauern
Mountains_, a chalet where bread, milk, and a guide may be found, also
a hay-bed for the night.


=Page 11.=--11-1. {=sie=} refers to {Rast}.

11-2. {=das Spitzen=} (verb-noun = English -_ing_). Infinitives used
substantively take the article {das}.

11-3. {=gnädiger Herr!=} (comp. Page 6, Note 1), here perhaps: _My
lord!_ or _Your Honor!_

11-4. {=doch=} (adverb, idiom.), here perhaps: _I hope_ or _I
suppose_.

11-5. {=is=} (dialect.) for {ist es}.

11-6. {=vor sich hin=}, cf. Page 5, Note 9.

11-7. {=es wird sein=}, idiomatic use of the future tense to express
probability or supposition, with the adverb, idioms {doch} or {wohl}
added to bring out the sense more clearly--_I hope that it is ..._ or
_is it probably ...?_


=Page 12.=--12-1. {=hin=} (colloq.) for {dahin} or {dorthin}.

12-2. {zwanzig =Büchsenschuß=}--nouns of quantity, weight or measure,
except feminines in {-e}, are used in the singular after a
numeral--_twenty gun-shots_, i.e. _twenty times the range of a
musket-ball_.

12-3. {=es werden sein=}, _it is, I think_, cf. Page 11, Note 7.

12-4. ({verarbeitet}, pass.) {=von=}, _by_. Participles usually
rendered by relative clause.

12-5. {=an= den Tischen}. Great care must always be taken in rendering
the preposition, {=„an“=} = =on= (mostly of time); _at, near, near by,
by the side of; to_ (motion). Here = ?

12-6. {=deren=} (partitive genit. of relat. pron.), cf. Page 1, Note
6.


=Page 13.=--13-1. {=wären=}. Account for the mood.

13-2. {=sich=} (dat. of interest) = {für sich}.

13-3. {=das Kruzifix=}--found everywhere in Catholic countries.

13-4. {=einen roten Tyro´ler=}, _a glass of the (red) claret of
Tyrol_.

13-5. {=man= hörte Stimmen}.--{man} (indef. pers. pron.), _one, they,
people_, or better by passive voice with {Stimmen} as subject.

13-6. ({=sie sind´s=}) = {sie sind es} (“they are it”), idiom. =
English?

13-7. {=was tausend!=} (or {der tausend!} or {potz tausend!})
According to “Grimm’s Wörterbuch,” {der tausend} stands for {der
Tausendkünstige} (_the One with thousand tricks_), a euphemistic
designation of the devil, analog. to English; =deuce!= Trans., _Good
Gracious!_

13-8. {=wir wären=}. The past subj. expresses an assumed (unreal)
result--_we came very near_.

13-9. {=Ihnen=} (ethical dative), expressing a more remote relation to
the person concerned in, or affected by an action or its
result--somewhat related to the Engl. expletive „you know“ of the
uneducated classes. Not translated.

13-10. {=die letze Artigkeit=} (ironically), refers to the student’s
mentioning dogs and ladies close together.

13-11. =Jamais= (French = {niemals}), _never_.--Characteristic of the
German students’ colloquial speech is the mixing of German with
foreign words and phrases.

13-12. {=als=} (dialect.), cf. Page 5, Note 10.

13-13. {=nach=}, _after, following, in the direction of, according
to_, in this sense it always follows its case.


=Page 14.=--14-1. {=so rot auch=}, _no matter how red_ ...

14-2. {=genommen=}. Note the omission of the auxiliary; in what
clauses only?

14-3. {=die drei Elstern=}, _those three regular magpies_.--The magpie
as a symbol of garrulity.

14-4. {=Onkel=}, a customary address in students’ language.

14-5. {=sich=} (dat. of reciproc. pron.) = ? Cf. Page 9, Note 8.


=Page 15.=--15-1. {=das=}. Note agreement with grammatical gender of
{Pärchen}.

15-2. {=nur einmal=} (adverb, idiom), transl. perhaps: _just for a
moment_.

15-3. {=das ist immer das erste=} ({was ich an einem fremden Platze
thue}, being implied).

15-4. {schaut’s} (= {schaut =es=}) {=aus=}, indef. = _things or
matters look_.

15-5. {=es thut= ausschauen}, familiar paraphrase for {es schaut aus}.

15-6. {=zum andern=} (obsol. phrase.), _for the second; in the second
place; furthermore, besides_.

15-7. {mit dem Schlafen ist es =alle=} (colloq. phrase) = {ist es
aus}, _there is no chance_ or _no prospect for a good night’s sleep_.

15-8. {=San´cho Pan´sa=}, name of the squire and companion of Don
Quixote in the Spanish poet’s Cervantes’s romance; trans. perhaps:
_ministering spirit or valet_.

15-9. {=fein=} (adverb), trans. somewhat like: _with a fine_ or
_elegant pronunciation_ or _accent_.

15-10. {=es ist gut=} (colloq. phrase) = {es ist abgemacht, es ist
genug;} _it is done_ or _settled_.

15-11. {=da hinten=} (=there behind=), _in the room in the rear; in the
backroom, in the servants’ hall_.

15-12. {=Euch=} (ethical dat.), cf. Page 13, Note 9.

15-13. {=biedre Leute=}, refers to a company consisting of guides,
hunters, shepherds, etc.


=Page 16.=--16-1. {Kerls} ... (foreign plural formation), colloq. for
{=Kerle wie die ...=}, _fellows as agile or lively as the ..._

16-2. {=sich=}. Account for the case. Cf. Page 9, Note 8. 3. {=kein
Wort ist zu verstehen=} (cf. Page 10, Note 5). The student could not
understand the mountaineers, since among themselves they use the
dialect of the Alpine districts.

16-4. {(prasselt’s) = prasselt =es=} (indef.) = {das Feuer prasselt}.

16-5. {=hier unten=}, _here on the floor of this room_.

16-6. =“comment trouvez-vous cela?”= (French) = {„Was denken Sie
davon?“}

16-7. {alle hatten =sich= vereinigt} (refl. for pass.), _all had been
placed together_.

16-8. {=am aufgeräumtesten=}, special form of the superlative, used
predicatively, _the merriest of all_.

16-9. {=es=} (introductory subject, the logical subject following
after the verb), {=möchten doch die Studenten= = die Studenten möchten
doch ...}


=Page 17.=--17-1. {=sich=}. Account for the idiom. Cf. Page 16, Note
7.

17-2. {=mein Herr=}, i.e. {der Herr, dessen Führer ich bin}, _my
employer_.

17-3. {=der giebt sonst keinen Laut von sich=}--said with reference to
the Assessor’s attitude while crossing the glacier.

17-4. {sich =fände=} (condit. subj.), for conditional.--Account for
the refl. form.

17-5. {=es= waren ... Lieder}, cf. Page 16, Note 9.

17-6. {=mir ist= lieb} ({=lieber=, am liebsten}), phrase: I like (_I
like better_, I like best).

17-7. {=soll leben!=}(Lat.: VIVAT! French: VIVE!) a toast: _Here’s to
..._ or _To the health of ..._ or _... forever!_

17-8. {=der=} (emphat.), = {dieser; der letztere; er}.

17-9. {=nichts=} (indef. neuter), for masc. and femin., {keiner,
keine} or {niemand}, _no one; nobody_.


=Page 18.=--18-1. An invocation for help to =Saint Florian=, the
patron-saint of those in danger of fire, here humorously uttered on
the approach of the red-haired valet of the Englishman.--St. Florian
(190-230 A.D.) was a German soldier in the Roman army and for being a
Christian was martyred by drowning in the river Enns (Austria) under
Emperor Diocletian.

18-2. {=zünd’t= = zündet}. The subject ({er} or {der Mann} or {der
Kerl hier}) to be understood.

18-3. {=Balan´ce=}, pronounce as in French.

18-4. Correct the Englishman’s faulty German.

18-5. {=behag´te=} (subj. impf.), for conditional {behagen würde} or
{sollte}.

18-6. {=woher´ des Landes, woher der Männer?=} The German translation
of the first half of the Greek hexameter: τίς πόθεν εἶς ἀνδρῶν;
πόθι τοι πόλις ἠδὲ τοκῆες; so frequently occurring in Homer:
„_Who art thou? And of what race of men? And where thy
home?_“--(William Cullen Bryant.)

18-7. {=sei=}--mood? why? State the question directly.

18-8. {=konnten= nicht weiter}. Account for the idiom. Cf. Page 5,
Note 12.


=Page 19.=--19-1. The second and third stanzas run thus:

        {Dort an dem Klippenhang,         2.
        Robin Adair!
        Rief ich oft still und bang:
        „Robin Adair!
        Fort von dem wilden Meer!
        Falsch ist es, liebeleer.
        Macht nur das Herze schwer.
        Robin Adair!“

        Mancher wohl warb um mich,        3.
        Robin Adair!
        Treu aber liebt’ ich dich,
        Robin Adair!
        Mögen sie and’re frei’n,
        Ich will nur dir allein
        Leben und Liebe weih’n,
        Robin Adair!}

There are several English versions written for the old Irish air
“Eileen Aroon,” all having =“Robin Adair”= as the refrain. The German
version by some unknown poet of the first quarter of the present
century, possesses all the charming simplicity and dramatic directness
of the {„Volkslied“} of earlier times. Though adapted to the same air
and with the same refrain, its contents are altogether original.--Of
the different English versions, the following comes nearest the German
wording, and may therefore be used in translating:

        Come to my heart again,
        Robin Adair!
        Never to part again,
        Robin Adair!
        And if you still are true,
        I will be constant, too,
        And will wed none but you,
        Robin Adair!

19-2. {=doch=}. Cf. Page 10, Note 11.

19-3. {=„Ännchen von Tharau,“=} a popular song by Simon Dach, a native
of East Prussia (1605-1659), made known to English readers through
Longfellow’s translation: „_Annie of Tharaw_.“

19-4. {=schlahn=} and (in the following verse) {=stahn=} (Sambian,
i.e. East Prussian dialect) for {schlagen} and {stehen}.


=Page 20.=--20-1. {=Verkno´tigung=}.--Longfellow renders the fifth
strophe:

        Oppression and sickness and sorrow and pain,
        Shall be to our true love as _links to the chain_.

20-2. {=die Hitsche=}, “foot-stool,” (students’ slang) for {das
Katheder}, _professor’s chair_ or _desk_.

20-3. {=er=}, refers to {Ausdruck}.

20-4. {=das Volkslied=} (sing., collectively), for pl.,
{„Volkslieder“.}

20-5. {=hier=}, i.e. in the Alpine districts of Bavaria, Austria, and
Tyrol whose people, old and young, for ages have been noted for their
remarkable skill of giving vent, extempore, to their feelings in the
form of {„Schna´derhüpfel“} (lit., reapers [= country-people’s]
dancing-songs) or “Tyrolese ditties.” They have all the same rhythm,
are sung to the accompaniment of the cithern, the favorite musical
instrument of the mountaineers, and recite in verse, more or less
rude, the interests of mountain-life, such as the adventures of
lovers, and the mysteries of fairyland, etc.

20-6. {=singt’s!=} (Alpine dialect) = {singt!}--{=einmal=} (indef.,
persuasivly), _just sing! won’t you?_

20-7. {=einen Steirer=}, _a Styrian country-dance_--a musical
recitative accompanied by the cithern and set to a tune sufficiently
rhythmical to act as one of the original purposes of a ballad, namely
a dance tune.

20-8. {=zahlt=}, here = {muß zahlen} or {hat zu zahlen}.

20-9. {=einen Zwanziger Münz=}, _a 20-kreutzer-piece_ (also called
{ein Kopfstück}), equal to 10 American cents, trans. _a dime_.

20-10. Dialect. = {„das würde schon ganz recht} (or {gut}) {sein.“}

20-11. {=wie es Euch ums Herz=} (or {zu Mut}) {=ist=}, cf. Page 4,
Note 2.


=Page 21.=--21-1. {=einen Herzog-Maxländler=}, _a country-dance tune_,
named after the popular _Duke Max_ Joseph of Bavaria, the father of
the lamented Empress Elisabeth of Austria, whose recent assassination
(September 10, 1898) in Geneva (Switzerland) startled the whole world.

21-2. =in optima forma= (Lat. phrase), _in the best possible manner_
or _masterly_.

21-3. {=mit dem Gemsbarte=} ({am Hut}), cf. Page 5, Note 1.

21-4. {=mit= den Armen}, omit the preposition in English.

21-5. {=man=}, best to be rendered by changing to passive with the
relat. pron. as subject.

21-6. {=es=} (indef.), here = {eine Stimme} or {der Gesang}.

21-7. Dialect. =

        {Und zwei Blätter und zwei Blumen
        Und eine Rebe um einen Stamm,
        Und was einander} (dat.) {bestimmt ist,
        Das find’t sich auch zusamm’.}

21-8. {=was--das=} (neuter, correlative), idiom, for masc. and
fem. pl. = {die, welche}, _those who_.

21-9. {=a=} (dialect.) = (1) {ein, eine, ein}, and (2) {auch};
here = ?

21-10. {schallte =es=} (cf. Note 6, above), _another voice was heard_.

21-11. Dialect. =

        {Behüt dich Gott, mein kleines (liebes) Mädchen,
        Es muß ja so sein,
        Mein Leben gehört dem Kaiser,
        Mein Herz gehört dein!

        Und mein Herz, das laß ich
        Daheim in deinem Haus,
        Sonst träf’s vielleicht eine Kugel,
        Und die Lieb’ ränn’ (flösse) all heraus!}

21-12. {=es=} (introductory or grammatical subject), cf. Page 16,
Note 9.


=Page 22.=--22-1. Dialect. =

        {Seid gescheit! Seid gescheit!
        Nicht in alles gleich hinein!
        Es sitzt oft ein Fuchs
        In einer Pelzkappe drein (drin)!}

The meaning is: Do not hurry in matters of love, for appearances are
often deceitful, and what at first glance looks like a smooth and
comfortable fur-cap (or fur-coat) may after all prove the hiding-place
of a cunning fox; a simile taken from the old mountaineer’s sphere of
observation (cp. the biblical phrase “a ravening wolf in sheep’s
clothing”).

22-2. {=ja=} (adverb. idiom), _why, you know!_ or _you must know_.

22-3. {für’=s= Geld}, in English without article.

22-4. {=wohl=} (adverb. idiom), _sure enough_; _it is true_.

22-5. {=guter Dinge sein=} (a phrase with adverbial genit. of manner
or quality), _to be of good cheer_ or _in high spirits_ (“in high
feather”).

22-6. {=nahm sich auf die Seite=}, trans., _called to his side_.

22-7. {=es=} (indef.), here for (the contents of) _pans and pots_.

22-8. {=dafür, daß er nicht singen könne=} (lit., for this that he
could not sing), _for his being unable to sing_.

22-9. {=spielte=} (obj. {die Zither} being implied).

22-10. {=es geht was=} (= {etwas}) {=drauf=} (colloq. phrase),
_considerable money is spent_, or _business is booming_.

22-11. {=was thut’s?=} (colloq. phrase), _what does it matter?_


=Page 23.=--23-1. {=machen=} (in colloquial language used as
substitute for almost any verb, = Eng. to get); {sich machen unter
...} = {sich mischen} or {sich begeben unter ...}

23-2. {=sich=} (dat. of interest) = {für sich}, _for himself_
(exclusively).

23-3. {=es=} (indef.), here perhaps _“curiosity.”_

23-4. {=wie wäre es?=} (condit. subj.), for condit. {würde es sein?}
(how would it be?), _how would it do?_ or _what do you think of ...?_

23-5. {=erzählte=} (subj. impf.) = {erzählen würde}.

23-6. {=es wird nicht viel werden mit dem Schlaf heute Nacht=}
(colloq. phrase), _sleep is hardly to amount to anything to-night_.

23-7. {trotz Ihres =hohen Bettes=}--to spare room, in the Alpine huts
the _beds_ are found _high up_ on the wall, near the ceiling of the
room, resting on pegs driven into the wall.

23-8. {=mein Fräulein=}--directed to Elsa.

23-9. {=das wäre schön=}, cf. Note 4, above.

23-10. {Fräuleins} (pl. for {Fräulein}), comp. {Kerls} for {Kerle},
Page 16, Note 1.


=Page 24.=--24-1. {=wes=} (obsol. genit. for {welches}) {=Zeichens und
Standes=} (colloq. phrase with adverbial genitive) lit., “what the
inscription of my sign-board is and my [social] standing,” trans.,
_what my occupation is and my standing in life_.

24-2. {=wo ... her=} (separated) for the more common form {woher´}.

24-3. {=nie´derrheinisch=}, _from the Lower Rhine_, i.e. from the
northwestern part of Germany.

24-4. {ehrlicher Leute =Kind=} (sing., collectively), a phrase for
{ehrlicher Leute Kinder}. Cf. Page 20, Note 4.

24-5. {=es=} (indef.), perhaps: _things_ or _affairs_.

24-6. {=es=} (indef.), here perhaps: _my fate_ or _a change in my
life_.

24-7. {=es wurde ... gestrickt=}, _some little knitting was done_.

24-8. {=wanderten=} (=wandered=). Account for the idiom. Cf. Page 4,
Note 12.

24-9. {=es=} (introductory or grammatical subject); what is the
logical subject?

24-10. {=doch=} (adverb. idiom), adds force to the request.

24-11. {=geben Sie mir die Körbchen!=}--The point lies in the double
meaning of the phrase {Einem einen Korb geben} = (1) literally: _to
give one a basket_, and (2) figuratively: _to refuse a suitor_; _to
give “the sack”_ or _“the mitten.”_


=Page 25.=--25-1. {=es=} (indef.), here _the thought_.

25-2. {=komm=}. Note the sudden change of address from the formal
second pers. pl. to the affectionate second pers. singular.

25-3. {=die=} (emphat.) = {diese, sie}--how known that it is not
relative pronoun?

25-4. {=um so hübscheres=}, _all the prettier_.

25-5. {ein Kuß =brannte=} (=burnt=), _was fired_.

25-6. {=ob=} (obsol. prepos.) = {über} or {wegen}.

25-7. {=es=} (introductory), _there_.

25-8. {=es hat nicht seine Richtigkeit mit der ...=}, _there is_ (or
_must be_) _some misconception as to her being a ..._

25-9. {=Knigge’s „Umgang mit Menschen,“=} _Baron Knigge’s_ (1751-1796)
once famous standard book „_Instruction in Deportment_.“

25-10. {=Pen=}(pronounce as in French){=sions´mutter=}.


=Page 26.=--25-1. {=sich=} (dat. = {mit sich}), _with himself_; _in
his mind_.

25-2. {=das=}, refers to the kissing and embracing.

25-3. {=kurze Verlobungszeit=}, while as a rule, in Germany, years
elapse _between betrothal and marriage_ of a young couple.

25-4. {=bei mir=} ({zu Hause} being understood).

25-5. {=wohin´=} ({wir reisen sollten} being understood).

25-6. {kamen =gefahren=}. Note the idiomatic use of the
perf. partic. instead of the pres. partic. after {kommen}--_came
riding_ or _driving_.

25-7. {=wo ... hin´=fährt} (separated), for the more common form
{wohin ... fährt}. Cf. Page 24, Note 2.

25-8. {=Kassel=}, capital of the Prussian province of Hesse-Kassel.

25-9. {=hast du=} (cf. Page 2, Note 1) = {wenn} (time) {du hast}.

25-10. {=Frankfurt a. M.=}, _Frankfurt-on-the-Main_ (river), a
far-famed city of the Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau.--From 1562 to
1792 the German emperors were crowned in the Frankfurt Cathedral. The
town was also the residence of the German kings under the _Franconian_
Dynasty, 768-911, after whom the town has been named.

25-11. {=sagt=}--colloq. omission of an adverb as {darauf} or {da}.

25-12. {=da´hin laß mich mit dir, o mein Geliebter, ziehen!=} _there,
O, my true lov’d one, thou with me must go!_ (Thomas Carlyle).--These
words of Mignon forming the refrain of each of the three strophes of
Goethe’s ballad „Mignon“ (see page 28) are here skillfully and
affectionately attributed to the young wife of the narrator.

25-13. {=uns=} (dat. of interest), humorously, trans. somewhat like
_to our edification_.

25-14. {=wir gehen=}--present tense instead of the future, to express
an immediate or certain future as if actually present, or it may be
taken in the sense of an imperative.

25-15. {=Heidelberg=}, town in the grand-duchy of Baden, charmingly
situated on the Neckar (river), with a famous university founded in
1386, the oldest in the present German Empire.

25-16. {Heidelberg, =das Wetterloch!=} (_bad weather-quarters_). In a
similar manner, Joseph Victor Scheffel, the life-long admirer and bard
of Heidelberg, complains of the wet character of the old
university-town on the Neckar, in the closing line of the Preface to
his “Gaudeamus,” a collection of merry college-songs, where he says:
{„_Der_} genius loci {_Heidelbergs ist feucht_,“}--now a familiar
quotation.

25-17. {=sitzt=}. Cf. Note 11, above.

25-18. {=im „Ritter,“=} i.e. {im Hotel „zum Ritter,“} an inn in the
Market-Square of Heidelberg, erected in 1592, almost the only house in
town which escaped destruction by the French in 1693.


=Page 27.=--27-1. {=Freiburg im Breisgau=}, also called {Freiburg in
Baden} (abbrev. {Freiburg i. B.}, for either designation), a town with
university, in the southern part of the grand-duchy of Baden,
beautifully situated on the western edge of the Black Forest.--About
{Breisgau} see the Vocabulary.

27-2. {=u. s. w.=} (abbrev. for {und so weiter}), _and so on_.

27-3. {=der Blauen=} (“=Blue= Mountain”), name of one of the highest
peaks in the Black Forest; in translation retain the German form of
the name.

27-4. {=was=}, colloq. for {etwas}.

27-5. {=guck=}, colloq. for {sieh!}

27-6. {=mal=}, colloq. for {einmal} (indef., adverb. idiom), cf. Page
20, Note 6.

27-7. {=siehste=}, colloq. contraction of {siehst du}, “you see”; _you
know_; _you must know_.

27-8. {=das= sind die Alpen} (idiom), _these_ are the Alps.--The
neut. sing. of the demonstrat. pron. ({das}), when immediately
preceding or following the auxil. {sein}, is used without regard to
the gender and number of the logical subject (here {die Alpen}).

27-9. {=der Sankt Gott´hard=}, _St. Gothard_, a mountain-group of the
Lepontine Alps of Switzerland.

27-10. {=wollten=} (idiom., infinit. {gehen} or {reisen} being
understood), cf. Page 5, Note 12.

27-11. Remember that the longing of the Germans for Italy is
proverbial.

27-12. {=Land=} for {das Land}. Note the force of the ellipsis.

27-13. {=wo die Citro´nen blühen=}, likewise a quotation from Goethe’s
ballad „Mignon,“ the text of which is found on Page 28.

27-14. {=zu tragen=} = {welcher in der Hand _zu tragen war_}, cf. Page
10, Note 5.

27-15. {=es=}. Account for the idiom. Cf. Page 24, Note 9.

27-16. {=Mai´land=}, the German name for _Milan_ in the Lombard plain.

27-17. {=Ge´nua=}, the German name for _Genoa_ in Northern Italy, a
seaport charmingly situated on the Gulf of Genoa in the Mediterranean
Sea.

27-18. {=wat=} (dialect of the Lower Rhine), for High German {„was}.“

27-19. =avan´ti!= (Ital.), _forward!_

27-20. {=der Vesuv´=}, _Mount Vesuvius_, the most noted volcano in the
world, situated on the Bay of Naples, nine miles southeast of Naples
(Italy).

27-21. {ging’s} = {=ging es=} (indef.), cf. Page 3, Note 4.

27-22. {=Vene´dig=}, the German name for _Venice_; {„über Venedig,“}
by way of Venice; _via_ Venice.

27-23. {=fest´geschneestöbert=} (perf. partic.), a bold verb-formation
consisting of {„fest“} (fast; up) and {„das Schneegestöber“}
(snow-storm) = {eingeschneit}, _snowed up; snow-bound_.

27-24. State three mistakes in the Englishman’s German.


=Page 28.=--28-1. {=al´so die=} (emphat.), _so, they_, or _they,
then_.--Remember that {also} is never = English “also.”

28-2. {=gewesen=}. Explain the idiom and supply the proper form of the
auxiliary.

28-3. In English with definite article.

28-4. {=mal=}, cf. Page 27, Note 6.

28-5. {=Einem im Garten wachsen=} (colloq. phrase), _to fall to one’s
share_; {wenn doch ... =wüchse=}.--The past subj. expresses a wish the
realization of which is not expected by the speaker.

28-6. {=Hora´tius=}, _Horace_.--Quintus “Horatius” Flaccus (65-8
B.C.), a famous Roman lyric and satirical poet. {=Virgil´=},
_Vergil_.--Publius “Vergilius” Maro (70-19 B.C.), a famous Roman epic,
didactic, and idyllic poet.--Both Horace and Vergil extol in their
works Italian life and scenery.

28-7. {=das Loch=}, colloq. for {Stube} or {Studierzimmer};
comp. Goethe’s “Faust,” verse 399: {„Verfluchtes dumpfes Mauer_loch_
...“}

28-8. {=sein Leben=} (adverbial accusative expressing duration of
time) = {sein Leben lang} or {sein ganzes Leben lang}.

28-9. {=davon´=}, _of it_, i.e. of Italian life and scenery.

28-10. “=Bea´tus ille!=” _“Happy he!”_ or _“Fortunate that man!”_ the
much quoted beginning of the second epode of Horace:

        Beatus ille qui procul negotiis,
        Ut prisca gens mortalium,
        Paterna rura bobus exercet suis ...

28-11. The first stanza of Goethe’s ballad “Mignon” from the third
book of the novel {„Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre,“} in which Mignon, a
young Italian girl who has been abducted from home and taken to
Germany, gives vent to her longing for Italian skies:

        Know’st thou the land where citron-apples bloom,
        And oranges like gold in leafy gloom,
        A gentle wind from deep-blue heaven blows,
        The myrtle thick, and high the laurel grows?
          Know’st thou it then?
          ’Tis there! ’tis there,
        O, my true lov’d one, thou with me must go!
            (_Thomas Carlyle_).

28-12. {=wohl=} (adv. idiom, not easy to render), _perhaps_ or _say!_
or _then_ (explet.).

28-13. {=alles=} (idiomatic use of neut. sing. for masc. and fem. pl.)
= {alle}.


=Page 29.=--29-1. {=vor=} (of time), _ago_.

29-2. {=da´mit=} (emphat. = {hiermit}), i.e. {mit diesen Worten}.

29-3. {=die Ces´tiuspyramide=}, _the Pyramid of Cestius_ in Rome, a
huge monument, once the last resting-place of Caius Cestius, a Roman
prætor and tribune of the time of Emperor Augustus. Close to this
pyramid is _the Protestant Cemetery_, where _tall cypresses_ rise
above the graves of numerous English, American, German, and other
visitors. Prominent among those resting there are: Shelley, the
English poet (died 1822), whose heart only was buried there; the
tombstone of the English poet Keats (died 1821) bears the melancholy
inscription: _“Here lies one whose name was writ in water.”_ There is
also the grave of August Goethe (died 1830), the only son of the poet.

29-4. {=es=} (indef., “something”), _a thought_.

29-5. {=es=} (indef.) {=kämpfte in ihm=}, trans. perhaps: _there was a
struggling of feelings in his heart_.

29-6. The form {=im Jahre 18..=} may be read: {„achtzehn hundert und
so und so.“}

29-7. {=doch=} (adverb. idiom), here: _I hope_ or _let me hope_.


=Page 30.=--30-1. {=uns=}, reciproc. pron. = ?

30-2. The beginning of one of the most exquisite and popular treasures
of German lyric poetry, by the Austrian poet Ernst von Feuchtersleben
(1806-1849) with music by Mendelssohn-Bartholdi. The second and third
stanzas run thus:

                2.

        {So dir geschenkt ein Knösplein was,
        So thu es in ein Wasserglas;
          Doch wisse:
        Blüht morgen dir ein Röslein auf,
        Es welkt wohl schon die Nacht darauf,
          Das wisse!}

                3.

        {Und hat dir Gott ein Lieb’ beschert,
        Und hältst du sie recht innig wert,
          Die Deine;
        Es wird wohl wenig Zeit nur sein,
        So läßt sie dich so ganz allein;
          Dann weine!}


=Page 31.=--31-1. {=der Himmel hängt ihm voll Baßgeigen=} (a colloq.
phrase), _everything looks promising to him_; _he sees things ‘en
couleur de rose.’_

31-2. {=des Morgens=}--{=des Abends=}--and in the next line {=eines
Tages=}--are genitives expressing indefinite time _when_.

31-3. {=da´für=} (emphat.), _in return for this_ (or _that_).

31-4. {=sollte=}, here: _was to_.

31-5. {=im Leben=} for {in meinem Leben}. Explain the idiom. Cf. Page
4, Note 10.

31-6. {=ja=}--cf. Page 22, Note 2.

31-7. {=wohl=}--cf. Page 22, Note 4.


=Page 32.=--32-1. {=es=} refers forward to the contents of the
following sentence--remains untranslated.

32-2. {=wäre=}--mood? why? Cf. Page 28, Note 5.

32-3. {=sich=} (idiom.), reflexive form taking the place of passive,
as frequently.

32-4. {=fort=}--the perf. partic. of a verb of motion being implied.

32-5. {=es=} (introductory) = ?

32-6. {=sie durfte ins Freie=}. Explain the idiom. Cf. Page 5, Note
12.


=Page 33.=--33-1. {=jeden Abend=}--accusative expressing definite time
_when_; about indef. time see Page 31, Note 2.

33-2. {=brennend=} for {brennendes}--the neuter adjective ending {-es}
sometimes omitted in prose and frequently in poetry.

33-3. {=hin=} belongs also to {=-flackerte=}, = {hinflackerte}.

33-4. {=den=}--cf. Page 31, Note 5.

33-5. {=hätte=}--mood? why?

33-6. {=sei=}--mood? why?

33-7. {=es=} (introductory) = ?

33-8. {=Studien=}--sing.? rule?


=Page 34.=--34-1. {=der´art=} = {von der} (emphat.) {Art},
adverb. genit. of quality.

34-2. {=das=} refers to the contents of the letter.

34-3. {=die=} refers to {Briefe}.

34-4. {=aufs entschiedenste=}--form of the absolute adverb superlative
expressing a very high degree without implying comparison.

34-5. In English with indef. article.


=Page 35.=--35-1. The preposition {=durch=} (=through=) appended
adverbially to an accusative expressing duration of time.

35-2. {=die Lunge=} (sing.)--in English, pl.--comp. {die Asche}
(ashes), {der Dank} (thanks), {die Schere} (scissors), {die Zange}
(tongs).

35-3. {=die=} refers to {Reizbarkeit}.

35-4. {=wäre=}--cf. Page 13, Note 8.

35-5. {=Nizza=}, the German name for _Nice_ (Southern France) on the
shore of the Mediterranean Sea (“The Riviera”), a district noted for
its exceedingly mild climate.

35-6. {=Florenz´=}, the German name for _Florence_ (Ital.: “Firenze”).

35-7. Why {=das=} and not {die}? Cf. Page 15, Note 1.

35-8. {=Einen groß anschauen=}, phrase expressing astonishment.

35-9. {=Signo´ra=} (Ital., pronounce {sinjo´ra}), _young lady_.

35-10. {=bebenden Herzens=} (adverb. genit. of manner) = {mit bebendem
Herzen}.

35-11. {=da=} and {=hier=}, colloq. used one for the other.


=Page 36.=--36-1. =Monte Testaccio= (Ital., pronounce {testat´scho}) =
“Mountain of Sherds.”--Just beyond the limits of the Protestant
Cemetery in Rome (see page 29, Note 3), a wide and lofty hill rises,
called “Monte Testaccio” which at first looks as if it were a natural
elevation of the ground, but on examination proves to be nothing but
sherds of broken wine-jars. It was doubtless once the site of the
manufacture of these articles.

36-2. {=leuchtend=} = {mit leuchtenden Augen}.

36-3. That the information of the Roman cab-driver was incorrect, can
be seen from what has been said, Page 29, Note 3. But besides the
Protestant Cemetery, there is also a German Cemetery (“Cimetero dei
Tedeschi”), situated near St. Peter’s, the most ancient burial-ground
in Rome, instituted by Constantine the Great (306-337 A.D.), and
filled with earth from Mt. Calvary.

36-4. {=hin=}--explain the idiom. Cf. Page 32, Note 4.

36-5. {=wohl=} (adverb. idiom), how to render?


=Page 37.=--37-1. {=mir ist=} = {es ist mir} or {es ist mir zu Mut},
cf. Page 4, Note 2.

37-2. {=möchte=}--explain the idiom. Cf. Page 5, Note 12.

37-3. {=eine=} (emphatic), why?

37-4. {=heim=} (idiom) = ? Cf. Page 5, Note 12.

37-5. {=ihr=}, refers to {Fräulein Milla}.

37-6. {=Sie sie=}--for euphony the second {sie} might better have been
avoided by substituting {dieselben}.

37-7. {=einmal=} (indef.)--meaning?

37-8. {=recht=} (colloq.) for {recht genau} or {recht scharf}.

37-9. {=das= sind ihre Kinder}--Explain the idiom; cf. Page 27, Note
8.


=Page 38.=--38-1. {=wohl=} (adverb. idiom), here = ?

38-2. {=es geht mir ein Licht auf=} (colloq. phrase), _it begins to
dawn upon me_.

38-3. {die =heitere= Vorsteherin}, for {das heitere Wesen} or {den
heiteren Charakter der Vorsteherin}.

38-4. {=du räumst ... aus=}--the present tense with the force of an
emphatic imperative = {räume sofort ... aus!}

38-5. {=es blieb dabei=} (impers. phrase), _he insisted upon it_; _the
thing was settled_.


=Page 39.=--39-1. Account for {=sich=}; cf. Page 9, Note 8.

39-2. {=ihm war es=} (cf. Page 37, Note 1), {=wie wenn=}, syn. {als
ob}, {als wenn}.

39-3. {=die Studenten zählten die „Häupter ihrer Lieben“=} (lit. “the
heads of their beloved”). A quotation from Schiller’s {„Das Lied von
der Glocke,“} verses 225-226 of which run thus:

            {Er zählt die Häupter seiner Lieben,
            Und sieh! Ihm fehlt kein teures Haupt.}

        _The faces that he loves--he counts them o’er,_
        See--not one look is missing from that store.
            (_Edward Bulwer Lytton._)

here jocosely applied to the crowned heads stamped on coins; (comp.
Eng. “mopusses”).

39-4. {=d. h.=}, abbrev. for {das heißt}, = _i.e._

39-5. {=wohin´?=} supply the verb.

39-6. {=O´beritalien=} (=Upper Italy=), i.e. _Northern Italy_.

39-7. {=ein´geschlagen!=} (idiom.) perf. partic. for imperative =
{schlagen Sie ein!}


=Page 40.=--40-1. {=der alte Gemsbart=}, humorously for {der alte
Führer mit dem Gemsbart} (cf. Page 5, Note 1) {am Hut}.

40-2. {=zu=}--_to_, _towards_, _in the direction of_--in this sense
always following its case--or may be taken as prefix of comp. verb
{zuziehen}.

40-3. {=indem sie ... segneten=} (by pres. partic.), _praising_.

40-4. {=seinen=} refers to {Tauernwirt}.

40-5. {=Kaiser Franz Joseph in Gold=}, the picture of _Francis Joseph
I_, the present _emperor_ of Austria, _on a gold-piece_.

40-6. {=möchte für ihr Leben gern=} (phrase; lit., “would like for her
life”), _is exceedingly anxious_.

40-7. {=es=} (indef.) {=klopft=}, _there is a knocking_, or _somebody
knocks at the door_.

40-8. {=bei=} = {in dem Hause}.

40-9. {=es wird ihm ganz italienisch zu Mut=} (humorous phrase), _he
begins to feel like a genuine Italian_, or _as if he were in Italy_.

40-10. “=Entra´te pure!=” (Ital.), _Just come in! won’t you?_

40-11. {„=als=“} (Alpine dialect), cf. Page 5, Note 10.


=Page 41.=--41-1. {=seid Ihr es?=} (idiom., lit., “are you it?”) = ?

41-2. {=sie wollten=}--idiom?

41-3. {=wanderte fort=}, _was thrown away_; cf. Page 4, Note 12.

41-4. {=wie wenn=} = ? cf. Page 39, Note 2.

41-5. {=ist=} (idiom.). The German present tense expresses what “has
been and still is” = Engl. perfect tense.

41-6. {ist =es=} (indef.), cf. Page 15, Note 4.

41-7. {=englisch=}, _English style_.--This remark would suggest that
since their first meeting a lively intercourse and close friendship
had sprung up between Mr. Brown and the second Tenor.

41-8. {=vom feinsten=} ({Tabak} being understood).

41-9. {=dazu´=} (i.e. {zum Thee}).

41-10. {=seinem=}, refers to {der zweite Tenor´}.

41-11. {=klang=}, syn. {erscholl} or {wurde gesungen}, _was heard_,
_was sung_.




=VOCABULARY=


{=A.=}

{=a=} (_dialect._), {ein, eine, ein}, a (an); (= {auch}) also, too.

{=ab=} (_adv._), off, down; {auf und ab}, up and down.

{=A´bend=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), evening, night; {heute Abend}, this
evening, tonight.

{=A´benteuer=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), adventure.

{=a´ber=}, but, however; {wohl aber}, but (much more.)

{=ab´nehmen= (nahm, genommen)}, to take off.

{=ab´schneiden= (schnitt, geschnitten)}, to cut off.

{=ab´schwenken=}, to wheel aside; {rechts abgeschwenkt!} to the right
wheel!

{=Ab´sicht=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), intention; {seine Absicht auf ihre
Hand}, his thinking of marrying her.

{=abson´derlich=}, uncommon, strange, surprising.

{=Ab´teilung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), division, class.

{=ab´wärts=}, downwards, downhill.

{=ab´werfen= (warf, geworfen)}, to throw off _or_ down.

{=ach!=} (_interj._), ah! oh! {ach was!} (_interj._), ta, ta, ta!
whew!

{=acht´zehn=}, eighteen.

{=addie´ren=}, to add up, to sum up.

{=Adres´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), address.

{=ah´nen=}, to anticipate, to suspect.

{=ähn´lich=}, similar.

{=Ähn´lichkeit=}, _f._, resemblance, likeness.

{=Ak´tenstaub=}, _m._, dust of old legal rolls _or_ documents.

{=Ak´tenvieh=}, _n._ (_colloq._, _perhaps_) legal paper-worm,
red-tapist.

{=all=}, all, every.

{=al´le=} (_adv._), at an end, no chance; {es ist alle}, there is no
hope, there cannot be thought of ...

{=allein´=}, alone.

{=al´lemal=}, everytime, always.

{=al´lerhand=}, all kinds of.

{=al´lerseits=}, all around, on every side.

{=al´les=}, all, everything.

{=al´lesamt=}, each and every one.

{=al´leweil=}, always, all the time.

{=al´li=} (_dialect._) = {all, ganz}, all, altogether; {d’ Lieb alli}
(_dialect._) = {die ganze Liebe}.

{=allmäh´lich=}, gradually, by degrees.

{=all´zugroß=}, far too great, over-great, altogether too big.

{=Alm=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), Alpine meadow, mountain-pasture; {auf der
Almen}, (_old dat. sing._)

{=Al´pen=}, _pl._ Alps.

{=Al´pensteigen=}, _n._, mountain-climbing.

{=Al´penstock=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), “Alpenstock,” mountaineer’s
pole (with a ferrule).

{=als=} (_adv._), as, like; than; (_conj._) as, since, when; (= {als
ob},) as if; (_dialect._) = {immer}, always; {nichts als}, nothing
but.

{=al´so=}, thus, therefore, so, there.

{=alt=}, old, aged; {der Alte}, old man.

{=äl´tere=}, _see_ {alt}.

{=am= = an dem}.

{=Amts´diener=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), beadle, bailiff; office-boy.

{=Amts´leben=}, _n._, official life _or_ work.

{=Amts´stube=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), office, bureau, court.

1. {=an=} (_dat._, _accus._), on, at, in, near, by; to, for. {das
Erstaunen war an ihr}, it was now for her to be surprised.

2. {=an=} (_dialect._) = {einen}.

{=an´bieten= (bot, geboten)}, to offer.

{=an´binden= (band, gebunden)}, to form an acquaintance (with, {mit},)
to enter into a conversation (with, {mit}).

{=an´bringen= (brachte, gebracht)}, to put in, to start.

{=an´dere= (der)}, other; {das andere}, the rest.

{=an´ders=} (_adv._), differently, otherwise, (in) another way _or_
style.

{=an´erkennenswert=}, deserving acknowledgment.

{=An´fang=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), beginning, first half.

{=an´fangen= (fing, gefangen)}, to begin.

{=An´gabe=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), design, instruction.

{=an´gesehen=}, honorable, distinguished.

{=An´gesicht=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), face.

{=an´halten= (hielt, gehalten)}, to hold (up), to stop, to stay; to
apply (for, {um}); {um die Hand eines Mädchens anhalten}, to ask a
lady’s hand (in marriage).

{=An´hang=}, _m._, hangers-on, party.

{=an´kichern,= =sich=}, to giggle at one another.

{=an´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to arrive.

{=An´kömmling=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), newcomer, stranger.

{=an´langen=}, to arrive (at, {bei}).

{=an´legen=}, to put on, to help on.

{=an´merken=}, to perceive (from, {an}).

{=An´na=}, Anna, Anne.

{=Änn´chen=}, Annie.

{=an´nehmen= (nahm, genommen)}, to accept.

{=An´neliese=} (_a name_), “Anneliese,” Ann-Lizzie.

{=Ann´lieschen=} (_endearing form of_ {Anneliese}, _which see_).

{=an´schauen=}, to look at; {sich anschauen}, to look at each other.

{=an´schreien= (schrie, geschrieen)}, to shout (at one, _accus._).

{=an´sehen= (sah, gesehen)}, to look at, to view, to examine closely,
to behold; {Einem etwas ansehen}, to tell _or_ to read from one’s
face.

{=An´sicht=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), opinion.

{=An´stand=}, _m._, gracefulness, good grace, decorum.

{=an´ständig=}, proper, fair, passable.

{=an´stecken=}, to pin, to fasten.

{=An´stellung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), appointment, employment.

{=an´strengen,= =sich=}, to exert one’s self, to make efforts.

{=Ant´wort=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), answer; {Antwort geben}, to answer
(to, {auf}).

{=ant´worten=}, to answer, to reply.

{=an´ziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, to put on.

{=An´zug=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), suit of clothes, attire; approach;
{im Anzug sein}, to be coming on _or_ drawing near.

{=an´zünden=}, to set on fire, to light, to ignite.

{=Apothe´ke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), apothecary’s shop, drug-store.

{=Ar´beit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), work, study.

{=ar´beiten=}, to work, to study.

{=arg=}, bad; {es zu arg machen}, to come it too strong, to go too
far.

{=Arm=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), arm.

{=Art=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), manner; stock, race, family; {aus der Art
schlagen}, to degenerate; {nicht aus der Art schlagen}, to take after
one’s family.

{=ar´tig=}, polite(ly), courteous(ly).

{=Ar´tigkeit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), compliment.

{=Asses´sor=}, _m._ (_pl._ {Assesso´ren}), assessor, puisne-judge.

{=A´tem=}, _m._, breath, breathing.

{=A´temzug=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), breath; {in _einem_ Atemzug}, in
the same breath.

{=auch=}, also, likewise, too; even; {ob auch wirklich}, if in
reality.

{=auf=} (_dat._, _accus._), on, upon, at; to, towards; for (_time_),
after, according to; (_adv._), up; {auf und ab}, up and down, to and
fro.

{=auf´blühen=}, to begin to bloom, to blossom.

{=Auf´bruch=}, _m._, start, starting, setting out.

{=Auf´enthalt=}, _m._, stay, sojourn.

{=auf´erlegen,= =sich=}, to impose upon one’s self, to assume.

{=auf´erziehen= (erzog, erzogen)}, to bring up, to educate.

{=auf´fallen= (fiel, gefallen)}, to strike _or_ surprise (one,
_dat._).

{=Auf´fassung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), conception, representation,
interpretation.

{=auf´flammen=}, to flame up.

{=auf´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to rise; to open, to be unsealed; {ein
Licht geht mir auf}, it is dawning upon me.

{=auf´geräumt=} (_p.p._), cheerful, in high spirits, in full feather.

{=auf’m= = auf dem}.

{=auf´machen,= =sich=}, to prepare one’s self for a journey, to set
out for.

{=Auf´regung=}, _f._, excitement.

{=auf´schauen=}, to look up.

{=Auf´schlag=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), cuff, facings; {mit grünem
Aufschlag}, faced with green.

{=auf´schließen= (schloß, geschlossen)}, to open, to unlock, to
disclose.

{=Auf´schluß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), explanation, information;
{Aufschluß geben}, to explain.

{=auf´sehen= (sah, gesehen)}, to look up.

{=auf´stehen= (stand, gestanden)}, to rise (_from one’s seat_).

{=auf´steigen= (stieg, gestiegen)}, to rise.

{=auf´stoßen= (stieß, gestoßen)}, (_maritime term_), to run aground,
to come across.

{=auf´tauchen=}, to rise up, to spring up, to pop up.

{=auf´thun= (that, gethan)}, {=sich=}, to open (_intrans._), to be
opened (for one, _dat._).

{=Au´ge=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-n}), eye.

{=Au´genblick=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), moment.

{=aus=} (_dat._), out of, from.

{=aus´bleiben= (blieb, geblieben)}, to fail to come, to stop.

{=aus´dampfen=}, to evaporate.

{=Aus´druck=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), phrase, term; expression.

{=aus´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to fall short, to fail (one, _dat._).

{=aus´laufen= (lief, gelaufen)}, {=sich=} (_colloq._), to take
sufficient exercise by running, to have a good run.

{=aus´legen=}, to explain.

{=aus´räumen=}, to clear (_a room_).

{=aus´ruhen,= =sich=}, to rest one’s self, to take (some) rest.

{=aus´schauen=} (_impers._), to look; {wie schaut’s aus?} what is the
outlook?

{=aus´schlagen= (schlug, geschlagen)}, to refuse, to decline.

{=aus´sehen= (sah, gesehen)}, to look.

{=Aus´sicht=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), prospect, chance; {in Aussicht
stellen}, to hold out a prospect.

{=aus´sprechen= (sprach, gesprochen)}, to speak out, to express.

{=aus´steigen= (stieg, gestiegen)}, to get out, to alight.

{=aus´suchen=}, to select, to choose.

{=aus´wählen=}, to choose out, to pick out, to single out.

{=au´ßer=} (_dat._), besides; {außer sich vor Freude}, frantic with
joy.

{=aus´ziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, _intrans._, to leave, to start, to set
out.

=avánti!= (_Ital._), forwards!

{=A´zur=}, _m._, azure.


{=B.=}

{=Bahn=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), way, road; {sich Bahn brechen}, to force
one’s way, to break through.

{=Balan´ce=} (_French_), _f._, balance, dignity.

{=bald=}, soon, quick(ly), {bald ... bald}, soon ... soon, now ...
then.

{=bal´dig=}, early, quick, speedy.

{=bal´digst=}, as soon as possible.

{=Band=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), tie, ribbon.

{=bang=}, anxious(ly).

{=Bank´haus=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), banking house.

{=Bär=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), bear; (= {„zum Bären,“}) “The Bear-Inn.”

{=Ba´ritonstimme=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), barytone voice.

{=Barome´ter=}, _m._, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), barometer, (weather) glass.

{=Baß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), bass.

{=Baß´geige=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), bass-viol.

{=Bau´er=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), countryman, mountaineer.

{=bay´risch=}, Bavarian, of (in) the kingdom of Bavaria.

{=Beam´te(r)=} _m._ (_pl._ {-[n]}), official, office-bearer.

{=be´ben=}, to tremble.

{=Bedeu´tung=}, _f._ importance, moment.

{=Bedien´te(r)=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-[n]}), servant, footman, valet.

{=Bedin´gung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), condition.

{=Bedürf´nis=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-se}), need, want, requisite.

{=befeh´len= (befahl, befohlen)}, to order.

{=befin´den= (befand, befunden)}, {=sich=}, to find one’s self, to be.

{=Begeg´nung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), meeting.

{=begeh´ren=}, to ask, to apply for.

{=begin´nen= (begann, begonnen)}, to begin.

{=beglei´ten=}, to accompany.

{=begra´ben= (begrub, begraben)}, to bury, to lay to rest.

{=begrei´fen= (begriff, begriffen)}, to understand, to comprehend, to
apprehend.

{=behä´big=}, corpulent, stoutish.

{=behaf´tet=}, (_p.p._), decked, covered; provided, endowed.

{=beha´gen=}, to please, to suit.

{=behag´lich=}, comfortable (-bly), cosy (-ily).

{=behaup´ten=}, to assert, to claim, to say.

{=bei=} (_dat._), at, near, by, in the house of, by the side of, next
to; in (_weather_).

{=bei´de=}, both; {die beiden}, the two.

{=Bein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), leg.

{=beina´he=}, almost, nearly; {wir warfen beinahe um}, we had a narrow
escape of getting out.

{=bein’n=} (_dialect._) = {bei dem}.

{=beisam´men=}, together, assembled.

{=Bei´spiel=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), example.

{=Bei´trag=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), contribution, share, dues.

{=bekannt´=}, acquainted.

{=bekom´men= (bekam, bekommen)}, to get, to receive.

{=bekrän´zen=}, to festoon.

{=benu´tzen=}, to use, to utilize, to employ.

{=beob´achten=}, to observe, to watch.

{=bequem´=}, comfortable; {es sich bequem machen}, to make one’s self
comfortable (easy _or_ at home).

{=berech´nen=}, to calculate; {berechnet}, calculated, intended (at,
{auf}).

{=bereit´=}, ready, handy.

{=bereits´=}, already.

{=Berg=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), mountain.

{=Berg´schuh=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), mountain-shoe.

{=Berg´spitze=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), mountain-top, mountain-peak.

{=beschau´en=}, to look at, to examine.

{=Bescheid´=}, _m._, information, knowledge; {über (um) etwas
Bescheid wissen}, to know something of, to be conversant with
something.

{=beschei´den=}, modest(ly).

{=besche´ren=}, to give, to present, to bestow.

{=beschla´gen= (beschlug, beschlagen)}, to set, to stud; {mit Nägeln
beschlagen}, to clout.

{=beschleu´nigen=}, to hasten on, to quicken.

{=beschlie´ßen= (beschloß, beschlossen)}, to close, to finish.

{=beschnei´en=}, to snow over.

{=beschrei´ben= (beschrieb, beschrieben)}, to describe.

{=beschrie´ben=} (_p.p._), written upon.

{=bese´hen= (besah, besehen)}, to take a look at, to inspect, to
examine.

{=besin´nen= (besann, besonnen)}, {=sich=}, to consider, to
deliberate.

{=besi´tzen= (besaß, besessen)}, to possess, to own, to have.

{=beson´dere= (der)}, particular.

{=bes´ser=}, better.

{=be´ste= (der)}, best; {das beste}, what is the best of all.

{=bestel´len=}, to order; {sich bestellen}, to order for one’s self.

{=bestimmt´=}, (_p.p._), determined, decided, foreseen.

{=betrof´fen=}, (_p.p._), struck, perplexed, taken aback.

{=Betrüb´nis=}, _f._, affliction; “sorrow” (_Longfellow_).

{=Bett=}, _n._, (_pl._ {-en}), bed.

{=bewe´gen= (bewog, bewogen)}, to induce.

{=bewe´gen,= =sich=}, to move (_intrans._)

{=b’hü´at!=} (_dialect._) = {behüte}, save! protect! {b’hüat dich
Gott!} goodbye!

{=bie´der=} (_attrib._ {biedrer, biedre, biedres}), good and honest,
sturdy.

{=bie´gen= (bog, gebogen)}, to turn (round).

{=bie´ten= (bot, geboten)}, to bid; (= {anbieten},) to offer.

{=Bild=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), picture, image, illustration.

{=bil´lig=} (_adv._), justly, fairly, in fairness.

{=Bir´kenzweig=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), birchen rod.

{=bis=}, till, to; (_conj._), until; {bis über} (_accus._), up to;
{bis zu} (_dat._) to.

{=bisher´=}, up to this (that) time, till now (then).

{=bis´sel=} (_dialect._) = {bißchen}, little bit, somewhat; {a bissel
= ein bißchen}.

{=biß´chen= (ein)}, (a) little bit; (_adv._), somewhat, rather.

{=Bit´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), request; {dringende Bitte}, entreaty
(to, {an}).

{=bit´ten= (bat, gebeten)}, to beg, to request; {bitte!} please!
pray!

{=Bla´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), blister; {frisch gelaufene Blasen},
new-run blisters.

{=bla´sen= (blies, geblasen)}, to sound the bugle.

{=Bla´senpflaster=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), blistering plaster.

{=Blattln=} (_dialect._) _pl._ = {Blätter}, (leaf), leaves.

{=blau=}, blue; {seine blauen Wunder sehen}, not to know whether one
stands on his head or on his heels.

{=Bläu´e=}, _f._, blueness, bluish tints.

{=blau´weiß=}, blue and white.

{=Ble´amle=} (_dialect._) _pl._ = {Blumen}, flowers, buds.

{=blei´ben= (blieb, geblieben)}, to remain, to stay; {es bleibt
dabei}, the matter is settled; {stehen bleiben}, to stop.

{=Blick=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), glance, look, view.

{=bli´tzen=}, to flash, to gleam, to glitter.

{=blü´hen=}, to bloom, to blossom.

{=blüht ... auf=}, _see_ {aufblühen}.

{=Blu´me=}, _f._, (_pl._ {-n}), flower.

{=Blu´menbouquett=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), bunch of flowers,
flower-piece.

{=Blut=}, _n._, blood.

{=Blut´sturz=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), hemorrhage; {einen Blutsturz
haben}, to break a blood-vessel.

{=Bo´den=}, _m._, bottom, ground, floor.

{=Bow´le=} (English), _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), punchbowl.

{=brächt´s=} (_dialect._) = {brächte es}, _see_[E-7] {bringen}.

{=brau´chen=}, to need.

{=braucht´s=} (_dialect._) = {brauchen Sie} _or_ {braucht Ihr}, you
need.

{=Braut=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), bride-elect, one (_fem._) betrothed;
{als Braut und Bräutigam}, a couple engaged _or_ betrothed.

{=Braut´führer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), bridesman.

{=Bräu´tigam=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), one (_masc._) betrothed; {als Braut
und Bräutigam}, as engaged _or_ betrothed.

{=Braut´jungfer=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), bridesmaid.

{=Braut´mutter=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈}), bride’s mother.

{=Braut´paar=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), bride and bridegroom, young married
couple.

{=bre´chen= (brach, gebrochen)}, to break; {sich Bahn brechen}, to
force one’s way, to break through.

{=Breis´gau=}, _m._, the name of one of the most beautiful districts
of the grand-duchy of Baden.

{=bren´nen= (brannte, gebrannt)}, to burn, to get (too) hot; to smart,
to glow, to glare.

{=Brief=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), letter.

{=brin´gen= (brachte, gebracht)}, to bring, to offer; {fertig
bringen}, to bring about, to manage to do.

{=Bro´cken=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), crumb, piece, morsel.

{=bro´deln=}, to bubble.

{=Brü´cke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), bridge; {eine Brücke schlagen}, to
build _or_ to throw a bridge.

{=Bru´der=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈}), brother.

{=brum´men=}, to hum.

{=Brust=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), breast, heart.

{=b’stimmt´=} (_dialect._) = {bestimmt}, destined, intended.

{=Buch´klotz=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), beech-log.

{=Büch´senschuß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), gunshot, range of a
musket-ball; {zwanzig Büchsenschuß}, twenty times the range of a
musket-ball.

{=bunt=}, motley.

{=Bur´sche=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), young fellow, lad.


{=C.=}

=C,= in _music_ the name of the first or key-note of the modern normal
scale (= the _do_ of the Italians, and the _ut_ of the French).

{=Ces´tiuspyramide=}, _f._, Pyramid of Cestius.

{=chirur´gisch=}, surgical.

{=Citro´ne=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), citron (-tree), lemon (-tree).

{=Coupé=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-s}), coupé, the front seats of a diligence,
generally seated for three.

{=Cypres´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), cypress (-tree).


{=D.=}

{=d. h.=} (_abbrev._ = {das heißt},) i.e., viz.

{=da=} (_adv._), then, there; (_conj._), as, since, because, when; {da
oben}, up there.

{=dabei´=}, (_emphat._ {da´bei}), thereby, in it, at this occasion, at
these words, in doing so, at the same time.

{=da´bleiben= (blieb, geblieben)}, to remain behind.

{=Dach=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), roof.

{=dach´te=}, _see_ {denken}.

{=däch´te=}, _see_ {denken}.

{=da´für=}, for this.

{=daher´=} (_emphat._ {da´her}), thence, from there.

{=dahin´=} (_emphat._ {da´hin}), thither, there.

{=daho´am=} (_dialect._) = {daheim}, at home.

{=da´mals=}, at that time, in those days, the other day.

{=Da´me=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), lady.

{=damit´=} (_emphat._ {da´mit}), with this, with it.

{=däm´merig=}, dim, dimly lighted.

{=dam´pfen=}, to steam, to fume.

{=dan´ken=}, to thank.

{=dann=}, then, thereupon, afterwards; {dann und wann} (every) now and
then, at times; {dann wann}, when.

{=dan´nen=}, there; {von dannen}, thence, from thence, away.

{=daran´=} (_emphat._ {da´ran}), on it, at it, of it, from it.

{=daran´ sein= (war, gewesen)}, to be about.

{=darauf´=} (_emphat._ {dar´auf}), on it; thereupon, after, later.

{=darf=}, _see_ {dürfen}.

{=darin´=} (_emphat._ {dar´in}), in it.

{=darü´ber=} (_emphat._ {dar´über}), over it, since then.

{=darum´=} (_emphat._ {dar´um}), therefore, for this reason.

{=darun´ter=} (_emphat._ {dar´unter}), beneath (it).

{=das= = dieses} _or_ {dies}, this, that.

{=da´ sein= (war, gewesen)}, to be at hand.

{=daß=} (_conj._), that.

{=dau´ern=}, to last, to continue; {es dauerte ihm zu lange}, he found
it too long.

{=davon´machen,= =sich=}, to slip away; {sich in der Stille
davonmachen}, to steal away, to abscond.

{=dazu´=} (_emphat._ {da´zu}), to it, to this; {dazu gehören zwei}, it
requires two (participants).

{=dazu´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to happen to arrive, to join the
party.

{=dazwi´schen=}, between them, between there, between _or_ amongst.

{=dein,= =dei´ne,= =dein=}, (thy), your; (thine), yours.

{=de´nen=} (= {den´jenigen},) those.

{=den´ken= (dachte, gedacht)}, to think (of, _genit._), to recollect,
to remember; {sich denken}, to imagine, to picture to one’s self.

{=denn=} (_adv._), then, say! (_conj._), for, because.

{=den´noch=}, after all, for all that.

{=der,= =die,= =das=} (_relat. pron._), who, which.

{=der´art=}, in such a manner, to such a degree, so much.

{=de´ren=} (_genit._, _relat._), of whom.

{=dersel´be,= =diesel´be,= =dassel´be=}, the same, the like, the
latter, he (she, it).

{=derwei´len=}, meanwhile, while.

{=desglei´chen=}, the like.

{=des´sen=}, whose, of whom.

{=des´to=} (_adv._), so much; {desto mehr}, (so much) the more.

{=deuch´ten=} (_impers._), to think; {es deucht mir}, I think; {es
deuchte ihr}, she thought.

{=deut´lich=}, plain(ly), clear(ly).

{=deutsch=}, German.

{=Deut´sche(r)=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-[n]}), German (a native of Germany).

{=Deutsch(e)=}, _n._, German (_language_).

{=dich=}, (thee) you; {dich selbst}, yourself.

{=dicht=}, thick, dense, fast; (_adv._) close (-ly), immediately;
{immer dichter}, faster and faster.

{=dick=}, thick, stout, corpulent; dense, heavy.

{=dies=}, _see_ {dieser}.

{=die´ser,= =die´se,= =die´ses=}, (or {dies},) this, that.

{=Ding=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), thing; {guter Dinge sein}, to be in high
spirits, to be merry _or_ cheerful.

{=Dioan´dl=} (_dialect._), _n._ = {Mädchen}, girl, lassie, sweetheart.

{=dir=} (_dative_), (to thee), to you, you.

{=do=} (_dialect._) = {da}.

{=doch=}, yet; after all, for all that, indeed; (_with an imperative_)
please! pray!

{=Dok´tor=}, _m._ (_pl._ {Dokto´ren}), doctor, physician.

{=dop´pelt=}, double; (_adv._), twice as.

{=Dorf=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), village; {auf einem Dorfe}, in a
village.

{=dort=}, there, at that point.

{=dös=} (_dialect._) = {das, dies}.

{=drauf´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to be spent.

{=drau´ßen=}, out there, without, outside, out of the room.

{=drei=}, three; {dreien} (_dat._).

{=d´rein=} (_dialect._) = {darin´}, therein, within.

{=drein´schauen=}, to look, to appear.

{=drein´sehen= (sah, gesehen)}, to look, to have a (healthy, etc.)
face.

{=drei´ßig=}, thirty; {die Dreißig}, age of thirty, the thirties.

{=drin´gend=}, pressing, urging; {dringende Bitte}, entreaty (to,
{an}).

{=drit´te= (der)}, third.

{=drol´lig=}, droll (drollingly), funny.

{=drü´ben=}, over there.

{=drü´cken=}, to press, to weigh down, to shake.

{=drun´ten=}, down there.

{=du=} (thou), you.

{=Duft=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), odor, vapor.

{=dumm=}, silly, foolish.

{=dumpf=}, damp, close, dull, illiberal.

{=durch=} (_accus._), through, by, by means of, on account of.

{=durch´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to get along.

{=durch´s= = durch das}.

{=durch´sichtig=}, transparent.

{=durchzu´cken=}, to flash (to thrill) through.

{=dür´fen=} (_pres. t._ {darf, darfst, darf}; {dürfen}, etc.),
{durfte, gedurft}, to be allowed; {ich darf wohl}, I may be allowed.


{=E.=}

{=e´ben=} (_adv._), just, just now; {ebenso}, just as; {eben nicht},
not exactly.

{=E´bene=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), plain.

{=e´benfalls=}, likewise, also.

{=E´cke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), (street-)corner.

{=e´del=} (_attrib._ {edler, edle, edles}), noble, generous;
exquisite.

{=eh´= = e´he}.

{=e´he=}, before.

{=E´heherr=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}) (_humor._), wedded lord and master;
spouse.

{=E´heleute=}, _pl._, married couple.

{=e´her=}, sooner, before, rather.

{=E´hestand=}, _m._, matrimony, married life.

{=ehr´bar=}, decorous, official.

{=Eh´re=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), honor; {zu Ehren} (_dat. sing._), in
honor (of, _dat._).

{=eh´ren=}, to honor, to respect.

{=eh´renhalber=}, for form’s sake.

{=eh´renwert=}, deserving honor.

{=Ehr´geselle=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), groomsman.

{=ehr´lich=}, honest; plain, old-fashioned.

{=ei´gen=}, (one’s) own (= {eigentümlich},) strange, surprising,
particular.

{=ei´gentlich=} (_adv._), really, in reality.

{=ei´gentliche= (der)}, original, true, real.

{=Ei´le=}, _f._, hurry, haste; {in aller Eile}, post-haste, hurriedly.

{=ei´len=}, to hurry, to hasten.

{=ein,= =ei´ne,= =ein=}, a, an; one.

{=einan´der=}, each other, one another; {bei einander}, together.

{=ein´biegen= (bog, gebogen)}, to bend in, to turn in.

{=Ei´ner,= =Ei´ne,= =Ei´nes=} _or_ {einer}, {eine, eines}, one.

{=ein´fallen= (fiel, gefallen)}, to occur (to one, _dat._); {mir fiel
ein}, it occurred to me.

{=ein´geboren=}, native.

{=ein´geregnet=} (_p.p._), detained (kept in) by the rain.

{=ein´geschneit=} (_p.p._), snowed up, snow-bound.

{=einher´steigen= (stieg, gestiegen)}, to step _or_ walk along.

{=ei´niger,= =ei´nige,= =ei´niges=}, some, a little.

{=ei´nigermaßen=}, to some extent, ever so little, tolerably well.

{=ein´laden= (lud, geladen)}, to invite.

{=ein´leuchten=} (_impers._), to be clear _or_ obvious; {es leuchtet
mir ein}, I see it clearly.

{=einmal´=} (_indef._), once, sometime, at times; {je einmal}, ever;
{nicht einmal}, not even; {noch einmal}, once more, again; {wieder
einmal}, once more; another, again.

{=ein´richten=}, to fit up, to furnish (_a house_); {sich einrichten},
to establish one’s self, to settle.

{=eins=}, one thing, one thought; (_in counting_) one; {eins sein}, to
agree.

{=ein´schlagen= (schlug, geschlagen)}, to shake hands (_as a token of
agreement_).

{=ein´schneien=}, to snow up, to bury in snow.

{=ein´setzen=}, to begin (_singing_), to strike _or_ chime in.

{=Ein´siedler=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), hermit.

{=einst=}, once, in time past, in olden times.

{=ein´stens=} (_obsol._), in time past, formerly, in by-gone days.

{=ein´treten= (trat, getreten)}, to step in, to enter.

{=ein´zelne= (der)}, different.

{=ein´zige= (der)}, (the) only, sole, single, one.

{=Eis=}, _n._, ice; glacier.

{=eis´hart=}, hard as ice.

{=Eis´schrunde=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), crevice in the (glacier-) ice.

{=Ei´senbahn=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), railroad.

{=Ei´senbahncoupé=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-s}), railway-car,
railway-compartment.

{=Ei´senbahnstation=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), railroad-station.

{=ei´sern=}, of iron; unwearied.

{=elegant´=}, elegant(ly), fashionable (-bly).

{=elektrisie´ren=}, to electrify.

{=El´sa=} (_or_ {Elsbeth}), Alice.

{=El´se=}, _same as_ {Elsa}.

{=El´ster=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), pie, magpie; {geschwätzige Elster},
regular magpie.

{=El´tern=}, _pl._ parents.

{=El´ternhaus=}, _n._ paternal roof, parental home.

{=empfan´gen= (empfing, empfangen)}, to receive.

{=En´de=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-n}), end; {am Ende}, at the end, after all;
{zu Ende sein}, to have come to a close.

{=en´den=}, to end, to come to an end, to terminate.

{=end´lich=}, at last, finally.

{=Eng´länder=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Englishman.

{=eng´lisch=}, English, English style; {auf englisch}, in English.

{=Eng´lisch(e)=}, _n._ English (_language_).

{=englisiert´=} (_or_ {anglisiert}), anglicized.

{=Entde´ckungsreise=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), exploring expedition,
reconnoitring.

{=entflie´hen= (entfloh, entflohen)}, to escape, to go, to leave.

{=entge´gendringen= (drang, gedrungen)}, to come towards, to float
towards, to reach.

{=entgeg´nen=}, to rejoin.

{=entrin´nen= (entrann, entronnen)}, to escape, to run away (from,
_dat._).

{=entschie´den=} (_p.p._), decided(ly), firm(ly), positive(ly).

{=entschla´fen= (entschlief, entschlafen)}, to pass away, to close
one’s eyes, to breathe one’s last.

{=entschul´digen=}, to excuse; {sich entschuldigen}, to apologize
(for, {wegen} [{über}]).

{=entschwin´den= (entschwand, entschwunden)}, to vanish (from,
_dat._).

{=Entzün´dung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), inflammation.

{=er=}, he, it.

{=er´ben=}, to inherit (from, {von}).

{=erfas´sen=}, to take hold of, to seize, to attack.

{=erfreu´en, sich=}, to enjoy (something, {an etwas}).

{=erhal´ten= (erhielt, erhalten)}, to get, to receive, to obtain; to
support, to maintain.

{=erho´len, sich=}, to recover.

{=Erin´nerung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), recollection, associations.

{=erja´gen=}, to get, to obtain.

{=erkran´ken=}, to be taken ill.

{=erlas´sen= (erließ, erlassen)}, to excuse one (_dat._) from, {zu}.

{=erlau´ben=}, to allow, to permit; {sich etwas erlauben}, to take
(liberties).

{=erle´ben=}, to experience, to pass through.

{=ernst=}, stern(ly), solemn(ly).

{=errei´chen=}, to reach.

{=erschei´nen= (erschien, erschienen)}, to appear, to make the
appearance, to attend (something, {auf}).

{=erschlie´ßen= (erschloß, erschlossen)}, to open, to disclose.

{=erschre´cken=}, to startle, to alarm.

{=erschre´cken=} ({erschrak, erschrocken}; _imperat._, {erschrick!}) to
be alarmed.

{=erschüt´tern=}, to shatter, to weaken.

{=erst=} (_adv._), only, not more than, but, still, yet, as yet.

{=Erstau´nen=}, _n._, astonishment, surprise.

{=er´ste= (der)}, first, former, next.

{=er´sterer,= =er´stere,= =er´steres=}, the former.

{=erwa´chen=}, to be awakened _or_ aroused.

{=erwir´ken=}, to procure.

{=erzäh´len=}, to tell, to relate, to report.

{=erzie´hen= (erzog, erzogen)}, to raise, to bring up, to educate.

{=es=}, it; there.

{=es´sen= (aß, gegessen)}, to eat.

{=Es´sig=} _m._, vinegar; {in Essig}, seasoned with vinegar.

{=et´liche=}, some, several, a few.

{=et´was=}, somewhat, something, rather; {so etwas}, something
similar, something like; {sonst etwas}, anything else.

{=Euch=} (_in address_), to you, you.

{=Exem´pel=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), example, instance; {zum Exempel}, for
instance.

{=Experiment´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), experiment.

{=Ex´trageschenk=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), extra-pay.


{=F.=}

{=fah´ren= (fuhr, gefahren)}, to ride, to drive; to run, to come, to
fall, to flash through, to come across; {es fuhr ihm in die Glieder},
terror thrilled through his limbs.

{=Fahrt=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), drive, ride, run.

{=fal´len= (fiel, gefallen)}, to fall, to fall in, to rush in, to make
a descent on; {sauer fallen}, to cost great pain.

{=fall´n=} (_dialect._) = {fallen}, to fall.

{=falsch=}, false, treacherous.

{=Fami´lie=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), family.

{=fan´gen= (fing, gefangen)}, to catch.

{=fängt an=}, _see_ {anfangen}.

{=fas´sen=}, to catch, to take; {sich fassen}, to compose _or_ collect
one’s self.

{=fast=}, almost, nearly.

{=feh´len=} (= {fehlgehen},) to miss one’s way.

{=fehl´treffen= (traf, getroffen)}, to miss the mark.

{=fei´ern=}, to celebrate, to solemnize.

{=fein=}, fine(ly), pure(ly), elegant(ly); {fein Obacht}, great _or_
close care; {vom feinsten}, of the best quality.

{=Feld=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), field.

{=Fen´ster=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), window.

{=Fe´rien=}, _pl._, vacation; {die großen Ferien}, summer vacation.

{=fern=}, far (from, {von}).

{=Fe´rne=}, _f._, distance; {in der Ferne}, at a distance.

{=fer´tig=}, ready, done; {fertig bringen}, to bring about, to be able
to do.

{=Fer´tigkeit=}, _f._, skill, perfectness.

{=fest=}, fast, firm, firmly established, secure.

{=fest´geschneestöbert=}, _p.p._, (_humor._), snowed up, snow-bound.

{=fest´halten= (hielt, gehalten)}, to hold fast, to arrest.

{=fett=}, fat, thick, bold; {mit dem fettesten Pinsel}, with the
boldest touches of the pencil.

{=feucht=}, moist.

{=Feu´erleiter=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), fire-ladder.

{=Fie´berphantasie=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), hallucination.

{=fiel ... ein=}, _see_ {einfallen}.

{=Finanz´mittel=}, _pl._, pecuniary resources, means, funds.

{=fin´den= (fand, gefunden)}, to find, to discover; {sich finden}, to
find one another, to be found; {es findet sich}, time will show.

{=find´t=} (_dialect._) = {findet}.

{=fing an=}, _see_ {anfangen}.

{=fin´gen an=}, _see_ {anfangen}.

{=fin´ster=}, dark, somber; {immer finsterer}, darker and darker.

{=Flach´land=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), flat land, lowland, plain.

{=Flachs=}, _m._, flax.

{=flachs´köpfig=}, flaxen-haired.

{=flam´men=}, to glow, to burn.

{=Fla´sche=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), (wine-) bottle.

{=Flat´terhaftigkeit=}, _f._, fickleness, unstability.

{=flat´tern=}, to flatter, to rave, to float.

{=flat´terte hinü´ber=}, _see_ {hinüberflattern}.

{=flech´ten= (flocht, geflochten)}, {=sich=}, to be twisted, to be
interwoven _or_ entwined.

{=Flech´tenmoos=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), lichens and tree-moss.

{=Fleisch=}, _n._, flesh.

{=Fleiß=}, _m._, industry, application, zeal; {eiserner Fleiß},
unwearied application.

{=Flie´ge=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), fly.

{=flie´gen= (flog, geflogen)}, to fly; to rush.

{=flim´mern=}, to glimmer, to twinkle.

{=flott=}, gay, dashing.

{=flüch´ten,= =sich=}, to escape, to take refuge.

{=fol´gen=}, to follow, to imitate; {folgend}, following, next.

{=Forst´frevel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), trespass on vert and venison;
poaching.

{=fort=}, away, off, gone, absent, out of town; {fort!} away! go!
leave!

{=fort´fahren= (fuhr, gefahren)}, to continue.

{=fort´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to leave, to depart.

{=fort´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to come _or_ get away, to get on.

{=fort´machen=} (_colloq._), to continue.

{=fort´wandern=}, to wander away _or_ off.

{=Fra´ge=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), question, inquiry.

{=fra´gen=}, to ask, to inquire, to examine.

{=Franz=}, Francis; {Franz Joseph}, Francis Joseph.

{=Franzo´se=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), Frenchman.

{=Frau=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), woman, (young) wife, lady.

{=Frau´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), pretty (young) wife.

{=Fräu´lein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), young lady, maid, miss, Miss; {altes
Fräulein}, old maid.

{=frei=}, free; {das Freie}, outdoors, open air.

{=frei´en=}, to make love to, to marry.

{=Frei´heit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), liberty, license.

{=frei´lich=}, is it true, sure enough, indeed; {ja freilich}, yes,
indeed!

{=fremd=}, strange; {bei fremden Leuten}, in the house of strangers;
{fremd thun}, to act like a stranger.

{=Frem´de(r)=}, _m._ (_pl._ [{-n}]), stranger.

{=Freu´de=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), joy, pleasure, amusement.

{=freuen,= =sich=}, to rejoice (in, _genit._), to be pleased (with,
_genit._), to look forward with pleasure (to, {auf}).

{=Freund=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), friend.

{=Freun´din=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), (lady) friend.

{=freund´lich=}, kindly, courteous(ly).

{=Freund´schaftsband=}, _n._, band (_or_ tie) of friendship.

{=frisch=}, fresh, cool, lively, brisk(ly), dashing(ly), fresh(ly),
new(ly); {frisch gelaufene Blasen an den Füßen}, feet blistered with
walking.

{=froh=}, glad, happy.

{=fröh´lich=}, gay(ly), merry (-ily).

{=früh=} (_adv._), early, early in the morning.

{=frü´her=}, former(ly); {von früher}, from a former occasion.

{=fühl´= = fühle}.

{=füh´len=}, to feel, to consider; {sich fühlen}, to feel; {ein
fühlendes Herz}, a tender _or_ sympathizing heart.

{=fuh´ren hinauf´=}, _see_ {hinauffahren}.

{=fuh´ren ... hinein´=}, _see_ {hineinfahren}.

{=Füh´rer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), guide.

{=fünf=}, five.

{=fünf´zehn=}, fifteen.

{=fun´keln=}, to sparkle, to flash.

{=für=} (_accus._), for.

{=Fu´scherthal=}, _n._, Fusch Valley, valley of the river Fusch in the
Eastern Alps.

{=Fuß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), foot, leg, (_sing. collect._) feet.

{=Fuß´sohle=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), sole of the foot, foot.

{=Fux=} (_dialect._) _m._ = {Fuchs}, fox.


{=G.=}

{=ganz=}, whole (wholly), entire(ly), complete(ly), altogether; {nicht
so ganz übel} (_colloq._), not amiss.

{=gar=}, very, very much, at all; {gar nicht}, not at all.

{=Gar´ten=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈}), garden.

{=Gas´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), street.

{=Gast=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), guest, visitor.

{=Gastein´=}, _f._, Gastein Valley.

{=Gast´haus=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), inn.

{=Gast´hof=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), inn, hotel.

{=ge´ben= (gab, gegeben)}, to give; {es giebt}, there is, there are.

{=ge´ben’s=} (_dialect._) = {geben Sie!}

{=gebor´gen=} (_p.p._), safe, secure.

{=Gedan´ken=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), thought, idea.

{=geden´ken= (gedachte, gedacht)}, to think (of doing, _etc._), to
have a mind (to, {zu},) to remember (something, _genit._).

{=Gedicht´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), poem.

{=gefähr´lich=}, dangerous.

{=gefal´len= (gefiel, gefallen)}, to please (one, _dat._).

{=Gefal´len=}, _m._, favor.

{=Gefol´ge=}, _n._, train; {im Gefolge}, followed by.

{=Gefühl´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), feeling, consciousness.

{=ge´gen=} (_accus._), against; towards, to.

{=Ge´gend=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), (adjacent) part of the country,
neighborhood.

{=ge´genseitig=} (_adv._), mutually, to each other.

{=gegenü´ber=} (_dat._), opposite to, over the way, in front of, in
face of; in presence of, in the face of.

{=Ge´genvorstellung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), remonstrance.

{=gehal´ten=} (_p.p._), staid, grave.

{=Geheim´nis=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-se}), secret.

{=ge´hen= (ging, gegangen)}, to go, to come, to walk, to pass, to
travel.

{=gehö´ren=}, to belong (to, _dat._); {dazu gehören zwei}, it requires
two (participants); {gehört in} (_dialect._) = {gehört dem}.

{=gehö´rig=}, due (duly), thorough(ly).

{=Geist=}, _m._, mind, mind’s eye, soul.

{=geist´voll=}, full of spirit, intelligent.

{=Geld=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), money; “gold,” (_Longfellow_).

{=Geld´beutel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), purse, money-bag.

{=gele´gen=}, _see_ {liegen}.

{=Gele´genheit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), occasion; {bei Gelegenheit}, at
(on) the occasion, in cases.

{=gelei´ten=}, to accompany, to conduct.

{=geliebt´=} (_p.p._), beloved.

{=gelit´ten=}, _see_ {leiden}.

{=gel´ten= (galt, gegolten)}, to mean, to concern; {es gilt ein
Leben}, a life is at stake.

{=gemein´sam=}, common(ly), mutual(ly).

{=Gems´bart=} _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), chamois-beard, chamois-hair
rosette.

{=Gems´bock=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), chamois-buck.

{=Gems´jäger=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), chamois-hunter.

{=genau´=}, close(ly), particular(ly).

{=geneigt´=} (_p.p._), esteemed; gentle, courteous.

{=Gene´sung=}, _f._, recovery, convalescence.

{=genug´=}, enough, plentiful(ly); {schön genug}, good enough.

{=Geplau´der=}, _n._, prattle, (small) talk.

{=gera´de=} (_adv._), just, exactly; {geradeso}, just as.

{=gera´ten= (geriet, geraten)}, to come _or_ get into.

{=gerin´ge= (der)}, little, small.

{möchte gern wissen}, should like to know.

{=Gesang´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), song, singing.

{=Geschäft´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), occupation, affair.

{=gesche´hen= (geschah, geschehen)}, to happen (to, _dat._), to occur,
to take place.

{=gescheit´=}, prudent.

{=Geschenk´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), present, gift, donation.

{=Geschich´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), story, tale.

{=Geschoß´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), projectile, shot, ball, bullet.

{=geschwä´tzig=}, talkative, garrulous.

{=geschwei´gen=} (_defective verb_), not to mention; {geschweige}
(_imperat. as adv._) {denn}, not to mention, to say nothing of, = much
less.

{=Geschwi´ster=}, _pl._, brothers and sisters.

{=Gesel´le=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), journeyman.

{=Gesell´schaft=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), society, race, company.

{=Gesicht´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), face; {ein verzweifeltes Gesicht
machen}, to look desperate _or_ hopeless; {am Gesicht ansehen}, to
read from one’s face.

{=gesinnt´=} (_p.p._), disposed.

{=Gespie´lin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), friend (companion _or_ playmate)
of one’s youth.

{=Gespräch´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), conversation.

{=Gestalt´=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), figure, personality, person, man.

{=gestat´ten=}, to permit, to allow; {es ist mir mehr gestattet}, I
enjoy more liberty, I am more independent.

{=geste´hen= (gestand, gestanden)}, to confess, to make a clean
breast.

{=Gestö´ber=}, _n._, snow-storm.

{=gestreng´=}, grave, severe.

{=gesund´=}, sound.

{=Gesund´heit=}, _f._, health.

{=Gesund´heitszustand=}, _m._, state of health.

{=gethan´=}, _see_ {thun}.

{=gewe´sen=}, _see auxil._ {sein}.

{=Gewis´sen=}, _n._, conscience; {aufs Gewissen}, in conscience.

{=gewiß´=}, certainly, apparently, it seems; {ganz gewiß}, most
assuredly.

{=gewöh´nen,= =sich=}, to get used _or_ accustomed (to, {an}).

{=gewohnt´=} (_p.p._), wont, accustomed; {gewohnt sein}, to be in the
habit.

{=gewor´den=}, _see_ {werden}.

{=g’fähr´lich=} (_dialect._) = {gefährlich}.

{=g’hört´=} (_dialect._) = {gehört}, belongs; {g’hört dein = gehört
dir}.

{=gin´gen ... ü´ber=}, _see_ {übergehen}.

{=Glacé´handschuh=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), kid-glove.

{=Glanz=}, _m._, lustre, brilliancy.

{=glän´zen=}, to glisten.

{=Glas=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), glass.

{=glau´ben=}, to believe, to think, to consider; {glauben an}, to
believe in.

{=glei=} (_dialect._) = {gleich} (_adv._), at once, in a hurry.

{=gleich=} (_adj._), like, alike, same, equal (to, _dat._); (_adv._)
at once, immediately, on shortest notice; (_conj._ = {obgleich},)
although, though.

{=gleich´gekleidet=}, dressed in like manner.

{=Glet´scher=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), glacier.

{=Glied=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), limb; {es fuhr ihm in die Glieder},
terror thrilled through his limbs.

{=glück´lich=}, happy, felicitous.

{=glü´hen=}, to glow.

{=gnä´dig=}, gracious; {gnädiger Herr!} Mylord! Your Honor! {der
gnädige Herr}, the gentleman.

{=Gold=}, _n._, gold.

{=gol´den=}, golden; most convenient.

{=Gold´orange=} (_French_), _f._, (_pl._ {-n}), gold-orange.

{=Gott=}, God, the Lord.

{=grad=} (_dialect._) = {gerade}, just so, quite so.

{=Gram=}, _m._, grief; {aus Gram}, with grief.

{=gräm´lich=}, sullen, sulky, morose.

{=gram´voll=}, sorrowful, aggrieved, grief-stricken.

{=grau=}, gray, of gray material; gray-haired.

{=grau´en=}, to dawn; {der Tag graut}, it dawns.

{=grau´sam=}, cruel, horrid.

{=grei´fen= (griff, gegriffen)}, to grasp, to catch (at, {nach}).

{=grob´geschnitzt=} (_p.p._), roughly carved.

{=groß=}, great, large, big, tall, long.

{=grün=}, green.

{=grün´den=}, to establish.

{=Grund´gewalt=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), fundamental power.

{=gru´selig=}, shuddering (at, {vor},) dreadful (over, {vor}).

{=grü´ßen=}, to greet, to salute.

{=gu´cken=} (_colloq._), to look, to peep; {guck mal!} just look
there!

{=Gul´den=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), “gulden,” florin (= 50 Americ. cents);
{ihre Gulden und Kreuzer}, their silver- and copper-coins _or_ their
change.

{=Gut=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), (_collect._) “goods” (_Longfellow_).

{=gut=}, good (well); {es gut haben}, to have a nice time of it; {gut
gehen}, to come _or_ pass off smoothly; {gut thun}, to do good, to be
good; {koan gut} (_dialect._), no good.


{=H.=}

{=ha!=} (_interj._), ha! hah! ah!

{=ha´ben= (hatte, gehabt)}, _auxil. verb_, to have.

{=ha´ben’s=} (_dialect._) = {haben Sie}.

{=ha´ger=}, haggard, thin; slender, lank.

{=halb=}, half, semi-.

{=halb´laut=}, in an undertone.

{=halb´verlegen=} (_p.p._), somewhat embarrassed, slightly perplexed.

{=Halm=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), straw.

{=Hals=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), neck.

{=halt=} (_adv. explet._), you know, you see, I think.

{=hal´ten= (hielt, gehalten)}, to hold _or_ take (for, {für}); {fest
halten}, to hold fast.

{=Ham´pelmann=}, _m._ (_colloq._), a toy-figure (“harlequin”) whose
limbs jerk with a string, a “quocker-wodger.”

{=Hand=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), hand, arm; {Einem die Hand geben}, to
marry one; {bei der Hand}, at hand, ready.

{=han´deln=}, to act.

{=han´gen= (hing, gehangen)}, to hang, to be suspended.

{=hän´gen=} (_for_ {hangen, hing, gehangen}), to hang; {hängen lassen}
({ließ, gelassen},) to hang (to droop) one’s head.

{=Hans=}, John, Johnny.

{=hat´te,= =hat´ten=}, _see auxil._ {haben}.

{=hät´te,= =hät´ten=}, should _or_ would _or_ could have, might have.

{=Haupt=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), head.

{=Haupt´thür(e)=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), main door.

{=Haus=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), house; {nach Hause}, home (_adv._);
{von Hause}, from home; {zu Hause}, at home.

{=hau´sen=}, to reside.

{=Haus´hälterin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), housekeeper.

{=Haus´haltung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), household.

{=häus´lich=}, domestic; {sich häuslich niederlassen}, to settle down.

{=he´da!=} (_interj._), hoy! hoay! say! you there!

{=hef´ten,= =sich=}, to be attached (to, {an},) to be connected (with,
{an}).

{=hef´tig=}, violent, severe.

{=Heim=}, _n._ home.

{=heim=}, home; (= {heim´gehen},) to go home.

{=hei´misch=}, native, national; comfortable(-bly), at home.

{=Hei´rat=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), marriage.

{=hei´raten=}, to marry.

{=hei´ßen= (hieß, geheißen)}, to be called _or_ named; {wie heißen
Sie?} what is your name?

{=hei´ter=}, cheerful.

{=hel´fen= (half, geholfen)}, to help, to send help, to assist (one,
_dat._).

{=hell=}, bright, clear, shrill.

{=her=}, here, hither; {hin und her}, hither and thither, one way and
the other; {von ... her}, from.

{=herauf´=}, up; {hier herauf}, up here; {von ... herauf}, up here
from.

{=herauf´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to come up.

{=heraus´=}, out; {aus ... heraus}, out from.

{=heraus´flattern=}, to flutter _or_ wave (from, {aus}).

{=heraus´jagen=}, to drive _or_ turn out (outdoors); to rouse.

{=heraus´rücken=}, to come out (with, {mit},) to speak one’s mind
freely.

{=herbei´bringen= (brachte, gebracht)}, to bring forward, to produce.

{=Her´berge=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), inn, public house.

{=herein´=}, herein, in(to); {herein!} come in!

{=herein´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to come in, to enter.

{=herein´treten= (trat, getreten)}, to step _or_ walk in, to enter.

{=her´flackern=}, to flare _or_ flicker hither; {hin- und
herflackern}, to flicker one way and the other.

{=her´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to come _or_ hail (from, {von},) to
arise (from, {von},) to be caused (by, {von}).

{=Herr=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), master, owner, employer, lord,
gentleman, Mr.; {Herr Professor}, Professor; {Herr Assessor!}
Assessor! {Herr Wirt!} Landlord! {gnädiger Herr!} My Lord! {der
gnädige Herr}, the gentleman.

{=Her´renstube=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), travellers’-room, inn-parlor.

{=herr´lich=}, splendid, magnificent, delightful.

{=Herr´n= = Herren}, _pl._

{=Herr´schaften=}, _pl._ ladies and gentlemen.

{=herr´schaftlich=}, belonging to a man of high standing; {ein
Bedienter in herrschaftlichem Kleide}, footman in livery.

{=her´stellen=}, to make, to manufacture.

{=herum´=}, round, about; {um ... herum}, just around.

{=herum´tragen= (trug, getragen)}, to carry about.

{=herum´treiben= (trieb, getrieben)}, {=sich=}, to rove (to gad)
about.

{=herun´terschauen=}, to look down.

{=herun´tersingen= (sang, gesungen)}, to sing from the first to the
last verse.

{=herun´tersinken= (sank, gesunken)}, to be degraded.

{=hervor´schauen=}, to look out (from, {aus}).

{=hervor´treten= (trat, getreten)}, to come forward (with, {mit},) to
betray plainly (something, {mit}).

{=hervor´ziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, to draw out, to produce.

{=her´wandern=}, to draw near, to advance.

{=Herz=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-en}), heart; {von Herzen}, with all one’s
heart, heartily.

{=herz´allerliebst=}, darling.

{=herz´ergreifend=}, affectionate(ly), pathetic(ally).

{=herz´haft=}, hearty(-ily).

{=herzin´niglich=} (_adv._), heartily, warmly, from the bottom of
one’s heart.

{=Herz´l=} (_dialect._), _n._ = {Herz}, heart.

{=Her´zog-Max´ländler=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), a country-dance named
after Duke Max in Bavaria.

{=heu´len=}, to roar (_of the storm_).

{=Heu´schober=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), haystack.

{=heu´te=}, to-day; {heute Mittag}, to-day at noon; {heute Abend},
this evening, to-night; {heute Nacht}, this night, to-night.

{=hier=}, here.

{=hierü´ber=}, over this, on this, at this.

{=Hil´fe=}, _f._, help, assistance.

{=Him´mel=}, _m._, heaven, sky.

{=him´melblau=}, sky-blue.

{=Him´melreich=}, _n._ (kingdom of) heaven; (_fig._) paradise.

{=Him´melsgegend=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), point of the compass.

{=hin= = da´hin}, thence, there; {an ... hin}, along on the side of;
{hin und her}, hither and thither, to and fro, one way and the other,
(= {hingegangen},) passed, past.

{=hinab´=}, down.

{=hinauf´=}, up (the hill).

{=hinauf´dehnen,= =sich=}, to extend _or_ stretch up (the mountain).

{=hinauf´fahren= (fuhr, gefahren)}, to drive _or_ ride up.

{=hinauf´klettern=}, to climb up, to ascend.

{=hinauf´schauen=}, to look up.

{=hinauf´tönen=}, to soar up, to rise up.

{=hinauf´ziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, to pull up.

{=hinaus´=}, out (into, in).

{=hinaus´blicken=}, to look out.

{=hinaus´schauen=}, to look out (on _or_ into, {auf}).

{=hinaus´schmettern=}, to ring out.

{=hinaus´wittern=}, to scent out (into, {in}).

{=hin´dern=}, to hinder, to prevent (from, {an}).

{=hinein´=}, into; {in ... hinein}, right into.

{=hinein´fahren= (fuhr, gefahren)}, to ride _or_ to travel into.

{=hinein´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to go _or_ travel into.

{=hinein´jagen=}, to drive or force (into, {in}).

{=hinein´träumen, sich=} to dive, to go deep (into, {in},) to take
into one’s head.

{=hin´fahren= (fuhr, gefahren)}, to be bound for, to go to.

{=hin´flackern=}, to flare _or_ flicker thither; {hin- und
herflackern}, to flicker one way and the other.

{=hin´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to go _or_ travel there.

{=hin´schauen=}, to look (to, {nach}).

{=hin´ten=}, behind, in the rear.

{=hin´ter=} (_dat._, _accus._), behind.

{=hin´tere= (der)}, (being) back, in the rear; {die hintere Stube},
backroom.

{=Hin´tergrund=}, _m._, background.

{=hinterher´=}, behind, following.

{=hinterher´kommen=}, ({kam, gekommen},) to follow behind.

{=Hin´termann=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), rear-rank-man, follower.

{=Hin´terstube=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}) backroom, servants’ hall.

{=hinü´ber=}, over (to, {zu}); {nach ... hinüber}, over to.

{=hinü´berblicken=}, to look over (to, {zu}).

{=hinü´berflattern=}, to flutter (wave, float) over _or_ back.

{=hinü´berziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, to take over, to cause to move (to,
{zu}).

{=hinun´tersteigen= ({stieg, gestiegen},) to descend.

{=hinun´terwürgen=}, to swallow down, to devour.

{=hinzu´fügen=}, to add.

{=Hirsch=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), stag; (= {„zum Hirsch[en]“},) “The
Stag-Inn.”

{=Hit´sche=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), _colloq._, footstool.

{=Hi´tze=}, _f._ heat, flush.

{=hoch=} (_attrib._, {hoher, hohe, hohes},) high, upper, “alto.”

{=hochauf´geschossen=}, tall and slender.

{=höchst=} (_adv._), highly, extremely, in the highest degree.

{=höchst´eigen=} (_humor._), most private.

{=Hoch´würden=}, _f._ (_a title_), right reverend (priest).

{=Hoch´zeit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), wedding; {auf einer Hochzeit}, at a
wedding (-party).

{=Hoch´zeitsaltar=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), nuptial (wedding-)altar.

{=Hoch´zeitsessen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), wedding-dinner, wedding-feast.

{=Hoch´zeitsgeschichte=}, _f._ story of one’s marriage.

{=Hoch´zeitskutsche=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), wedding-coach.

{=Hoch´zeitspaar=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), bridal couple.

{=Hoch´zeitsreise=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), wedding-trip.

{=Hoch´zeitstafel=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), wedding-table, wedding-dinner
_or_ feast.

{=hol´la!=} (_interj._) holla! halloo!

{=Hora´tius=} (_a name_), Horace.

{=hör´bar=}, audible (-bly).

{=hö´ren=}, to hear.

{=Hotel´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-s}), hotel.

{=hübsch=}, pretty, fine.

{=Hund=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), dog.

{=hun´dertmal=}, (a) hundred times.

{=Hut=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), hat, bonnet.

{=Hü´terin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), guardian, custodian.

{=Hüt´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), hut, cabin, châlet-quarters.


{=I.=}

{=ihm=} (_dat._), him, to (for, with, _etc._) him.

{=ihn=} (_accus._), him (it).

{=Ih´na=} (_dialect. dat._ = {Ihnen}, _for accus._ {Sie}), you.

{=ih´nen=} (_dat._), to them, them.

{=Ih´nen=} (_dialect._, _dat._) _for accus._ {sich}, yourself.

{=Ihr=} (_in address_), you.

{=Ihr,= =Ih´re,= =Ihr=} (_possess. pron._) your.

{=ihr,= =ih´re,= =ihr=}, her, to her; their.

{=ih´rer=} (_genit. pl._), of them.

{=Im´biß=}, _m._, repast, light meal.

{=im´mer=}, always, ever; {immer finsterer}, darker and darker; {immer
noch}, still.

{=im´merhin=}, still, after all, at any rate.

{=in=} (_dat._, _accus._), in, at; into, to.

{=indem´=} (_conj._), while, whilst, _or by pres. partic._

{=indes´sen=}, in the meantime.

{=In´halt=}, _m._, contents, tenor, purport.

{=in´nehaben= (hatte, gehabt)}, to occupy.

{=in´nig=}, fervent(ly), ardent(ly), sincere(ly), close(ly).

{=ins= = in das}.

{=In´sasse=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), inmate, occupant.

{=Instinkt´=}, _m._, instinct.

{=Instituts´dame=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), directrix (_humor._, despot) of
a young ladies´ seminary.

{=Instituts´vorsteherin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), mistress of a young
ladies’ seminary.

{=Instrument´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), instrument.

{=interessant´=}, interesting.

{=ir´gend=}, some; {irgend ein ...}, some, some kind of a.

{=is=} (_dialect._) = {ist} _or_ {ist es}.

{=Ita´lien=}, Italy.

{=Italie´ner=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Italian, native of Italy.

{=italie´nisch=}, Italian, _or_ as if in Italy.


{=J.=}

{=ja=} (_adv._), yes; (_explet._), why, you know! certainly; {nun ja},
well then, yes indeed.

{=ja´gen=}, to chase, to drive, to force, to arouse; (_intrans._) to
be driven, to dash, to fly.

{=Jahr=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), year.

=jamais= (_French_), never.

{=Jam´mer=}, _m._, misery, misfortune.

{=je=}, ever; {je einmal}, ever.

{=je´der,= =je´de,= =je´des=}, each, every; {ein jeder}, each one,
every one.

{=je´desmal=}, each time, always.

{=jetzt=}, now, the present moment; {bis jetzt}, till now, till then,
up to that minute.

{=Johann´=}, John.

{=Jop´pe=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), shooting jacket of coarse woolen cloth.

{=Jo´seph=}, Joseph; {Franz Joseph}, Francis Joseph.

{=Juch´zer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), shout of joy, yodling.

{=ju´gendlich=}, youthful.

{=Ju´gendlust=}, _f._, happiness of youth.

{=Ju´gendschlaf=}, _m._, sleep of youth.

{=Ju´gendtage=}, _pl._, days (time) of youth.

{=jung=}, young.

{=Jun´ge=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), boy, lad, fellow; {alter Junge!} old
fellow!

{=jün´gere=}, _see_ jung.

{=Jung´frau=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), maid.

{=Jung´geselle=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), old bachelor.

{=Jüng´ling=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), youth, young man.

{=just=} (_obsol._), just.


{=K.=}

{=Kaf´feekränzchen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), coffee-circle, coffee-party.

{=Kaiser=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Emperor.

{=Kai´serschmarren=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), omelet.

{=kalt=}, cold.

{=käm´=} (= {käme}, _condit._).

{=kam herein´=}, _see_ {hereinkommen}.

{=kam ... vor=}, _see_ {vorkommen}.

{=Kamerad´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), comrade, chum.

{=Kamil´lenthee=}, _m._, camomile-tea.

{=käm´pfen=}, to combat, to struggle.

{=kann=}, _see_ {können}.

{=Kärn´then=}, name of an Austrian crown-land.

{=Ka´sten=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), chest, box, trunk.

{=Ka´tzensprung=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), (_colloq._) “cat’s leap” (=
small distance), _analog._: “cockstride.”

{=kaum=}, hardly.

{=kein,= =kei´ne,= =kein=}, no, not any.

{=kei´ner,= =kei´ne,= =kei´nes=}, none (of them), nobody.

{=ken´nen= (kannte, gekannt)}, to know, to be acquainted with; (=
{erkennen},) to recognize.

{=Kerl=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), fellow.

{=Ke´tzer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), heretic.

{=keu´chen=}, to pant, to gasp, to puff and blow.

{=ki´chern=}, to giggle, to titter.

{=Kien´span=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), pine-block.

{=Kind=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), child; {liebes Kind}, darling.

{=Kind´lichkeit=}, _f._, childishness.

{=Kir´che=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), church.

{=Kirch´hof=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), cemetery, burial-ground.

{=kla´gen=}, to lament.

{=Klamm=}, _f._, mountain-cleft, glen; cañon, canyon.

{=Klang=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), timbre (of the voice), sound.

{=klar=}, clear, clear-eyed; plain, evident.

{=Klause=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), hermitage.

{=kle´ans=} (_dialect._) = {kleines}, little, young, sweet.

{=Kleid=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), dress, garment, uniform; {ein
herrschaftliches Kleid}, livery.

{=klin´geln=}, to ring (the bell).

{=klin´gen= (klang, geklungen)}, to ring, to chime, to sound, to
clink; {klingende Münze}, clinking coin.

{=Klip´penhang=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), sloping cliff _or_ crag.

{=klop´fen=}, to knock, to beat, to tap (at, {an}); {es klopft}, some
one knocks at the door.

{=klug=}, smart, wise, intelligent.

{=Klümp´lein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), small lump, heap; {auf einem
Klümplein}, all of a heap.

{=knal´len=}, to crack, to pop.

{=Knix=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), courtesy; {einen Knix machen}, to drop
(bob) a courtesy (to, {vor}).

{=Kno´chen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), bone.

{=Knösp´lein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), rose-bud.

{=Kno´tenpunkt=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), junction (_railroad_).

{=knüp´fen=}, to tie, to knot, to join closely.

{=koan=} (_dialect._) = {kein}, no, not any.

{=Koa´sa=} (_dialect._), _m._ = {Kaiser}, Emperor (_i.e._ Francis
Joseph of Austria).

{=ko´chen=}, to cook, to boil, to make (_tea_).

{=Kof´fer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), trunk.

{=kom´men= (kam, gekommen)}, to come.

{=kommt´s= = kommt es}.

{=Kompagnie´=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), _pronounce_ {kompani}, company.

{=Konfusion´=}, _f._, confusion, perplexity.

{=kön´nen=} (_pres. t._ {kann, kannst, kann}; {können}, _etc._);
{konnte, gekonnt}, to be able, to be ready, can, may.

{=können’s=} (_dialect._) = {können Sie}; {können’s} {_Ihnen_}
(_dat._) for {können Sie} {_sich_} (_accus._).

{=könnet’s=} (_dialect._) = {können es}.

{=könn´te=}, could, might.

{=Kontinent´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), continent.

{=Konzert´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), concert.

{=Kopf=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), head.

{=Körb´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), little basket.

{=Korn=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), grain (of snow _or_ ice); _pl._,
snow-sprinkling.

{=Korresponden´tin=}, _f._, (_pl._ {-nen}), correspondent.

{=korrespondie´ren=}, to correspond.

{=ko´sten=}, to cost, to be the price; {was kostet?} what do you
charge?

{=Kraft=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), power, strength; {über meine Kräfte},
beyond my power.

{=kräf´tig=}, vigorous(ly), spirited(ly), hearty (-ily).

{=krank=}, sick, ill; {die Kranke}, patient; {sehr krank}, critically
ill.

{=krank´haft=}, morbid, diseased.

{=Krank´heit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), sickness, illness; {in Krankheit
sinken}, to fall ill.

{=Kränz´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), circle, party; meeting-place of a
party _or_ club.

{=Krap´fen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), fritter, doughnut.

{=Kreis=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), circle; {im Kreise}, round about.

{=Kreu´zer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), “kreutzer” (= 1/60 Gulden); {ihre
Gulden und Kreuzer}, their silver and copper-coins _or_ their change.

{=Kro´ne=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), (royal) crown.

{=Kru´zifix=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), crucifix.

{=Kü´che=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), kitchen.

{=Ku´gel=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), bullet, ball.

{=kun´dig=}, skilful, experienced.

{=kunst´gerecht=}, skilful(ly), knowingly.

{=kurz=}, short, brief, concise.

{=Kuß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), kiss.

{=Kut´sche=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), coach, carriage.


{=L.=}

{=L=}, _n._, the letter “L.”

{=lä´cheln=}, to smile (at, {über}).

{=la´chen=}, to laugh; {das Lachen}, laughing.

{=lä´cherlich=}, laughable, funny.

{=La´ger=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), resting-place.

{=la´gern, sich=}, to lie down, to have settled down, to lodge one’s
self.

{=Land=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), land, country; {woher des Landes?}
from what country?

{=Land´assessorrock=} (for {Landgerichtsassessorrock},) _m._ (_pl._
{-̈e},) uniform of an assessor of the county-court.

{=Land´gericht=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), county-court, district-court.

{=Land´gerichtsassessor=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-assesso´ren}), assessor of
the county-court.

{=Land´gerichtspräsident=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), president of the
district-court.

{=Land´gerichtsrat=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), judge of the
district-court.

{=Land´karte=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), map, traveller’s map.

{=lang=} (_adv._) = {lange}.

{=lan´ge=} (_adv._), long, a long time, for a long time; {wie lange?}
how long?

{=lang´sam=}, slow(ly), little by little.

{=längst=} (_adv._), long since, for some time, for a long time.

{=lang´weilig=}, tedious, wearisome, dead-alive.

{=las´sen= (ließ, gelassen)}, to let, to allow, to make, to leave;
{merken lassen}, to show, to betray something; {Einem etwas schreiben
lassen}, to have something communicated to one; {Einen allein lassen},
to leave one.

{=lau=}, mild, genial.

{=Laub=}, _n._, foliage.

{=Lauf=}, _m._, run, course; {im schnellen Lauf}, in a short time.

{=lau´fen= (lief, gelaufen)}, to walk, to run; {frisch gelaufene
Blasen}, feet blistered with walking.

{=Laut=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), sound; {keinen Laut von sich geben}, not
to utter a word, to keep profoundly silent.

{=lau´ten=}, to run thus _or_ as follows.

{=le´ben=}, to live, to be living; {leb wohl!} farewell! good-bye;
{soll leben}, (= {lebe hoch!}) let us drink the health of ...! _or_
... forever!

{=Le´ben=}, _n._, life.

{=leben´dig=}, lively, animated.

{=Le´bensgeschichte=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), history of one’s life.

{=Leb´n=} (_dialect._) _n._, = {Leben}, life.

{=le´dig=}, single, unmarried.

{=le´gen=}, to lay; {sich legen}, to cease, (_of bad weather_).

{=Leib´schneiden=}, _n._, gripes, colic.

{=Lei´chentuch=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), shroud, pall.

{=leicht=}, light(ly), easy (-ily), slight(ly), delicate(ly);
(_dialect._ = {vielleicht},) perhaps.

{=lei´den= (litt, gelitten)}, to suffer.

{=lei´der=} (_adv._), unfortunately, I am sorry to say.

{=Lei´nen=}, _n._, linen, linen goods.

{=lei´se= (der)}, faint (_suspicion_).

{=lei´se=} (_adv._), in an undertone; faint (_suspicion_).

{=Le´na=} (_abbrev. of_ {Hele´ne}), Ellen, Maud.

{=ler´nen=}, to learn, to study, to pursue one’s studies.

{=le´sen= (las, gelesen)}, to read.

{=Le´ser=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), reader.

{=Le´serin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), (female) reader.

{=letz´te= (der)}, last, final, finishing.

{=letz´terer,= =letz´tere,= =letz´teres=}, the latter.

{=leuch´ten=}, to flash, to beam.

{=leuch´tend=}, luminous, lucid, bright, with beaming eyes.

{=Leu´te=}, _pl._, people; men.

{=Li´ab’=} (_dialect._) _f._ = {Liebe}, love.

{=Licht=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), light.

{=Lieb’=} (= {Liebchen},) _n._, love, sweetheart.

{=lieb=}, dear; {mir ist lieb}, I like; {lieb haben}, to like, to
love; {sich lieb haben}, to love each other.

{=Lie´be=}, _f._, love.

{=lie´beleer=}, destitute of love.

{=lie´ben=}, to love, to like.

{=Lie´ben=}, _pl._, those beloved, the beloved ones.

{=lie´ber=}, better, rather, sooner; {lieber wollen}, to prefer.

{=Lie´besband=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e, -̈er}), tie of love.

{=liebst=}, dearest _or_ best of all.

{=Lieb´ste=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), beloved one, sweetheart.

{=lieb´wert=}, dearly beloved.

{=Lied=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), song.

{=Lie´derbuch=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), songbook.

{=lie´gen= (lag, gelegen)}, to lie, to be situated, to lie hidden _or_
concealed, to be latent.

{=Li´na=} (_abbrev. of_ {Pauline} _or_ {Paula}), Pauline.

{=Lip´pe=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), lip; (_pl._) {Lippen}, mouth.

{=Loch=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), hole, kennel, burrow.

{=lo´cken=}, to entice, to induce.

{=Lo´denkittel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), jacket made of coarse woolen
cloth.

{=Lo´denrock=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), coat of coarse woolen cloth.

{=Löf´fel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), spoon.

{=London Bridgestation=} (_English_), _f._ London-Bridge Station.

{=Lor´beer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), laurel(-tree), bay(-tree).

{=los!=} (_adv._), on then! up! heartily!

{=los´schießen= (schoß, geschossen)}, to shoot off, to fire off, to
let fly.

{=Lö´we=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), lion.

{=lud ... ein=}, _see_ {einladen}.

{=Luft=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), air.

{=Lun´ge=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), lungs.

{=lu´stig=}, hearty (-ily), merry (-ily), sound(ly), hard.


{=M.=}

{=ma´chen=}, to make, to do, to try; {ein Gesicht machen}, to look.

{=Mäd´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), girl, maid.

{=Madon´na=}, _f._ (_pl._ {Madonnen}), Madonna, Holy Virgin.

{=mag=}, _see_ {mögen}.

{=Mägd´lein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), young girl.

{=Ma´gen=}, _m._ stomach, appetite.

{=mah´nen=}, to warn, to remind, to urge, to press.

{=Mai=}, _m._, May (_month_).

{=Main=}, _m._, Main (_river_).

{=Mal=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), time; {zum ersten Mal}, for the first
time.

{=mal=} (_unaccentuated_) = {einmal´}, just, _or_ won’t you?

{=ma´len=}, to paint, to picture, to depict.

{=man=}, one; we, you, they, people, _or by pass. voice._

{=man´cher,= =man´che,= =man´ches=}, many a, many a man _or_ one.

{=manch´mal=}, several times, repeatedly.

{=Mann=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), man, husband, gentleman; {woher der
Männer?} of what nationality?

{=Manns´leute=}, _pl._ men, fellows.

{=Manns´person=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), male, male person.

{=Marsch=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), march, marching.

{=Maschi´ne=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), machine, tea-oven; {auf der
Maschine}, with the tea-kitchen _or_ tea-oven.

{=Mas´ke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), mask, disguise.

{=mä´ßig=}, moderate, slender, slim.

{=Mat´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), Alpine meadow.

{=Meer=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), sea, ocean, Mediterranean.

{=mehr=}, more; {nichts mehr}, nothing any more. {=mein,= =mei´ne,=
=mein=}, my.

{=mei´nen=}, to mean, to remark, to think, to expect.

{=mei´nige= (der, die, das)}, my own, mine.

{=meist=}, most; {am meisten} (_adv. superl._), most of all.

{=mel´den=}, to announce, to take in some one’s name _or_ card.

{=melo´disch=}, melodious.

{=Mensch=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), man, mankind, individual; _pl._
people.

{=Men´schenkind=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), human being.

{=Men´schenscheu=}, _f._ misanthropy; unsociableness, solitariness.

{=mensch´lich=}, human.

{=mer´ken=}, to note, to perceive; {etwas merken lassen}, to show, to
betray something.

{=merk´würdig=}, strange (to say), remarkable.

{=mi=} (_dialect._) = {mich}.

{=mich=} (_accus._), me.

{=mild=}, mild.

{=Mil´la=} (_abbrev. of_ {Camilla}), Camilla, Millie.

{=Miner´va=}, Minerva (a goddess of the Romans = “Pallas Athene” of
the Greeks); {Hotel Minerva}, “Hotel Minerva.”

{=Mini´ster=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Minister, Secretary (_of Justice_).

{=mi´schen,= =sich=}, to mix, to be mixed, to mingle, to join.

{=mit=} (_dat._), with; (_adv._) with _or_ by one’s self; {mithaben},
to be supplied _or_ provided with.

{=mit´feiern=}, to help one celebrating _or_ banqueting, to be (one)
of the (wedding-)party.

{=mit´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to go along with (them), to accompany.

{=mitsamt´=}, together with.

{=Mit´tag=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), midday, noon.

{=mit´teilen=}, to communicate (to, _dat._), to exchange, to impart
(to, _dat._), to make (one, _dat._) acquainted.

{=Mit´tel=}, _pl._ means, funds.

{=mit´telst=} (_genit._), by means of, through.

{=Mit´telstimme=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), tenor; baritone.

{=mit´ten=}, in the midst; {mitten unter}, in among.

{=Mit´ternacht=}, _f._ midnight.

{=mö´chte=} (_see_ {mögen}), might, should like.

{=mö´gen=} (_pres. t._ {mag, magst, mag}; {mögen}, _etc._), {mochte,
gemocht}, may, can, to like; {er mochte ... nicht gewesen sein}, he
could not have been...

{=mög´lich=}, possible, eventual.

{=Mög´lichkeit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), chance, opportunity.

{=mond´hell=}, moonlit.

{=Mond´schein=}, _m._, moon-light; (_humor._) baldness.

{=Mond´viertel=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), quarter of the moon.

{=mords´dumm=} (_colloq._), exceedingly stupid _or_ foolish.

{=Mords´qualm=}, _m._ (_colloq._), tremendous tobacco-smoke (_filling
a room_.)

{=Mor´gen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), morning; {des Morgens}, in the
morning; {des Morgens früh}, early in the morning.

{=mor´gen=}, to-morrow.

{=Mor´gengruß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), morning-salute, morning-music.

{=Mor´genluft=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), morning-breeze.

{=mor´gens=}, in the morning, every morning.

{=Mr.=} (= master, _pronounce_ mister), {Herr}.

{=m’r=} (_dialect._) = {wir}.

{=müh´sam=}, hard, difficult.

{=Mund=}, _m._, mouth.

{=mun´ter=}, sprightly, cheerful, blithe, awake.

{=Mün´ze=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), coin; {klingende Münze}, clinking coin
_or_ cash.

{=mur´meln=}, to grumble, to mutter.

{=Musikant´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), musician, singer.

{=müs´sen=} (_pres. t._ {muß, mußt, muß}; {müssen}, _etc._), {mußte,
gemußt}, must, to have to, to be compelled _or_ forced to, to feel
obliged to.

{=mu´stern=}, to eye, to survey.

{=muß=}, _see_ {müssen}.

{=Mut=}, _m._ mood, courage, humor; {es ist mir zu Mut}, I feel; {es
wird ihm italienisch zu Mut}, he begins to feel like an Italian.

{=Mut´ter=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈}), mother.

{=Mü´tze=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), cap.

{=Myr´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), (myrtletree).


{=N.=}

{=nach=} (_dat._), after; to, towards; {nach ... hinüber}, over to.

{=Nach´barin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), (female) neighbor.

{=Nach´barschaft=}, _f._, neighborhood; (_collectiv._) neighbors.

{=nach´folgen=}, to follow (one, _dat._).

{=nach´gemacht=} (_p.p._), imitated, fictitious.

{=nachgera´de=}, gradually, at length, by degrees, by that time.

{=nach´hängen=} (for {nachhangen},) to give way (to, _dat._), to
indulge (in, _dat._).

{=nach´schauen=}, to look after (one, _dat._).

{=nach´sehen= (sah, gesehen)}, to see, to look after, to consult.

{=nach´senden= (sandte, gesandt)}, to send after.

{=nach´spüren=}, to investigate.

{=näch´ste= (der)}, next.

{=nächst´folgende= (der)}, immediately following, one at whose home
the next meeting is to take place.

{=Nacht=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), night.

{=Nacht´licht=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), bedroom-candle, rush-light.

{=Nacht´quartier=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), night-quarters.

{=Na´gel=}, _m._[E-8] (_pl._ {-̈}), nail; {mit Nägeln beschlagen},
clouted.

{=nah,= =nä´her,= =nächst=}, near, (nearer, nearest); close, at hand,
in detail; {nahe daran}, close by (it).

{=Na´me(n)=}, _m._ (_pl._ {Namen}), name.

{=näm´lich=} (_adv._), that is to say, to wit, you must know.

{=Na´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), nose; {der Nase nach}, in the direction
of one’s nose; follow your nose!

{=Näs´se=}, _f._, wetness, dampness; {in gleicher Nässe}, in the same
rain, as drenched as ourselves.

{=naß=}, wet; fluid, liquid; {etwas nasses}, some kind of wet goods.

{=Natur´=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), nature.

{=naturell´=}, real, genuine, true.

{=Nea´pel=}, Naples.

{=ne´ben=} (_dat._, _accus._), by the side of, next to.

{=nebenbei´=}, incidentally, by way of parenthesis.

{=nebst=} (_dat._), together with.

{=neh´ma=} (_dialect._) = {nehmen}.

{=neh´men= (nahm, genommen)}, to take; {Einen Wunder nehmen}, to be
surprising to one.

{=nein=}, no.

{=’nein=} (_dialect._) = {hinein}, _i.e._ {sich hinein´stürzen}, to
rush into.

{=nen´nen= (nannte, genannt)}, to call, to name.

{=neu=}, new; {aufs neue}, anew, again.

{=neu´gierig=}, curious(ly), inquisitive(ly), staring(ly).

{=nicht=}, not.

{=Nich´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), niece.

{=nichts=}, nothing, not anything; {nichts mehr}, nothing any more;
{nichts als}, nothing but; {noch nichts}, nothing as yet.

{=ni´cken=}, to nod; {dankend nicken}, to express one’s thanks by
nodding.

{=nie=}, never.

{=nie´derbayrisch=}, of Lower Bavaria.

{=nie´dere= (der)}, lower.

{=nie´derlassen= (ließ, gelassen)}, {=sich=}, to sit down, to take a
seat; to settle, to locate _or_ to fix one’s self.

{=Nie´derrhein=}, _m._, Lower Rhine; {am Niederrhein}, somewhere on
the banks of the Lower Rhine.

{=nie´derrheinisch=}, from the Lower Rhine.

{=nie´derwerfen= (warf, geworfen)}, to prostrate.

{=nie´mand=}, no one, nobody.

{=nit=} (_dialect._) = {nicht}.

{=nix=} (_dialect._) = {nichts}, nothing, not ... anything.

{=noch=}, yet, still, more; {immer noch}, still; {noch nicht}, not
yet; {noch nichts}, not yet anything, nothing as yet; {was noch}, what
else; {weder ... noch}, neither ... nor.

{=Nor´den=}, _m._, north; {nach Norden}, (towards the) north.

{=Not=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), need, distress.

{=No´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), note, (_pl._) music.

{=No´tenbuch=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), music-book, singing-book.

{=Not´fall=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), case of need, extreme case.

{=not´wendig=}, necessary.

{=Nr.=} (_abbrev._ = {Nummer}, _f._), number.

{=nun=} (_adv._), now; (_explet._), well! sure enough! {nun ja},
well, then; yes, indeed.

{=nur=}, only, no one but.


{=O.=}

{=Oal´les=} (_dialect._) = {alles}, everything.

{=oanon´da=} (_dat._, _dialect._) = {einander} _or_ {für einander}.

{=ob=} (_dat._), over, above, at, on account of, (_conj._) if,
whether.

{=Ob´acht=}, _f._, attention, heed, care; {Obacht geben}, to pay
attention.

{=o´ben=}, up, above, up-stairs, (in) on the mountains.

{=o´bere= (der)}, upper.

{=O´beritalien=}, Upper Italy, Northern Italy.

{=obsolet´=}, obsolete.

{=Och´se=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), ox; (= {„Zum Ochsen“},) “The Ox-Inn.”

{=o´der=}, or.

{=O´fen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈}), stove.

{=O´fenecke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), chimney-corner.

{=of´fen=}, open, opened.

{=offenbar´=} (_emphat._ {of´fenbar}), evident(ly).

{=öff´nen=}, to open; {sich öffnen}, to open (_intrans._) = to be
opened.

{=oft=}, often, frequently.

{=öf´ters=}, often, frequently.

{=oh´ne=} (_accus._), without.

{=ohnehin´=}, without that, apart from that.

{=Ohr=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-en}), ear; {die Ohren spitzen}, to prick up
one’s ears; {bis über die Ohren}, up to one’s (ears) eyes.

{=Öl=}, _n._, oil.

{=On´kel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), uncle.

{=Operation´=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), operation.

{=Opodel´doc=}, _m._, opodeldoc-liniment.

{=Ort=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e} _or_ {-̈er}), place, town.


{=P.=}

{=Paar=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), pair, couple.

{=paar (ein)=}, a few.

{=packen=}, to pack, to pack up.

{=Palm´sonntag=}, _m._, Palm-Sunday.

{=Pär´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), loving couple, young couple.

{=pas´send=}, proper, appropriate, becoming.

{=Paster´zengletscher=}, _m._, Pasterze Glacier.

{=Pein=}, _f._, torment, trouble, “pain” (_Longfellow_).

{=Pelz´kappe=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), fur-cap, fur-coat; {in der
Pelzkappen}, (_old dat. sing._).

{=Pensions´drache=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), boarding-school dragon (--
duenna _or_ tyrant).

{=Pensions´mutter=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈}), boarding-school matron (_or_
-- duenna).

{=Pfarr´herr=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), parson, clergyman.

{=Pfei´fe=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), pipe.

{=Pfle´gebefohlene=}, _f._ (_pl._ -[{n}]), charge, ward.

{=phili´sterhaft=}, pedantic, narrow-minded.

{=Phili´sterhaftigkeit=}, _f._ (_students’ slang_), Philistinism,
pedantry; seclusion, “dumps.”

{=Pinsel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), (paint-) brush; {mit dem fettesten
Pinsel}, with the boldest touches of a brush.

{=Pinz´gau=}, _n._, Pinzgovia, Pinzgau.

{=pla´gen=}, to torment, to trouble.

{=Plaid=}, _m._, _n._ (_pl._ {-s}), plaid.

{=Platz=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), place, spot.

{=plötz´lich=} (_adv._), suddenly, all at once.

{=Poesie´=}, _f._, poetry.

{=Poet´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), poet.

{=Post´expeditor=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-expedito´ren}), post-master.

{=Po´stillon=} (_or_ {Postillion}), _m._, postilion, post-boy, driver
of a post-chaise.

{=Post´wagen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), post-chaise.

{=präch´tig=}, magnificent, sumptuous.

{=pras´seln=}, to crackle.

{=Profes´sor=}, _m._ (_pl._ {Professo´ren}), professor; {der Herr
Professor}, the _or_ their Professor.

{=Protestant´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), Protestant.

{=prü´fen=}, to examine, to try.

{=Punsch=}, _m._, punch.

{=Pyrami´de=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), pyramid.


{=Q.=}

{=Quartett´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), quartet, quartette; {zum Quartett},
for a quartet.

{=Quel´le=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), (well-)spring, source, quarter.


{=R.=}

{=Rän´zel=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), knapsack.

{=Ran´zen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), knapsack.

{=Ränz´lein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), knapsack, wallet.

{=rasch=}, quick, without stop.

{=Rast=}, _f._, rest, repose, stop.

{=Rat=}, _m._ (_pl._ {Ratschläge}), advice, opinion; {in Gottes Rat},
by divine providence.

{=rau´chen=}, to smoke.

{=Raum=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), room.

{=räu´men=}, to quit, to leave.

{=r’aus=} (_dialect._) = {heraus}, out (of it).

{=Reb´n=} (_dialect._), _f._ = {Rebe}, vine, tendril.

{=Recht=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), right; {recht} {_haben_}, to _be_ right.

{=recht=}, quite right, thoroughly well, very; {völlig recht}, all
right.

{=Rech´te=}, _f._, right hand, right side.

{=rechts=} (_adv._), at (on, to) the right.

{=recht´schaffen=} (_dialect._), very much, greatly, quite.

{=Re´de=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), speech, address.

{=re´den=}, to speak, to say, to utter, to talk (to, {mit},) to have a
talk with.

{=Re´gen=}, _m._, rain.

{=Re´gentstreet=} (_English_), _f._, Regent Street.

{=reg´nen=}, to rain.

{=reich=}, rich.

{=rei´chen=}, to reach, to hold out; {Einem die Hand reichen}, to hold
out one’s hand to one; to marry one.

{=Reich´tum=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), wealth, “riches” (_Longfellow_).

{=Rei´he=}, _f._, row, file, line; round, turn; {die Reihe ist an
mir}, it is my turn.

{=rein=}, pure; (_adv._) purely, absolutely; {rein nichts}, nothing at
all, nothing whatever.

{=Rei´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), trip, journey.

{=Rei´segedanke(n)=}, _m._ (_pl._ {Reisegedanken}), thought of
travelling, intention to travel.

{=Rei´sekleid=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), travelling-dress.

{=rei´sen=}, to travel, (= {abreisen},) to start, to depart, to leave.

{=Rei´sende(r)=}, _m._ (_pl._ -[{n}]), traveller, passenger.

{=Rei´separole=}, _f._, travelling-order.

{=Rei´sesack=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), travelling-bag.

{=Rei´setasche=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), travelling-bag, carpet-bag,
satchel.

{=Reiz´barkeit=}, _f._, irritability, sensitiveness, susceptibility.

{=’ren=} (_dialect._) = {einer}.

{=rich´ten=}, to turn, to direct (to, {auf},) “to surrender”
(_Longfellow_).

{=rich´tig!=} (_adv._), quite right! right so!

{=Rich´tigkeit=}, _f._, correctness, truth.

{=Rie´gel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), bolt.

{=ringsumher´=}, round about, all round.

{=Rit´ter=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), knight, cavalier.

{=Rom=}, Rome.

{=Rös´lein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), little rosebud.

{=rot=}, red, bound in red cloth; {rot werden}, to blush.

{=rot´backig=}, ruddy, red-cheeked, cherry-cheeked.

{=Rö´te=}, _f._, blush, flush, color.

{=Rot´kopf=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), red-haired person, “sandy-pate.”

{=rot´köpfig=}, red-haired.

{=rot´wangig=}, ruddy-cheeked, cherry-cheeked.

{=rü´cken=}, to move (_intrans._), to advance (to, {zu}); {näher
rücken}, to draw nearer.

{=ru´fen= (rief, gerufen)}, to shout, to call, to exclaim.

{=Ru´he=}, _f._, rest, repose.

{=ru´hen=}, to rest, to lie down.

{=ruh´ig=}, easy (-ily), tranquil(ly), calm(ly).

{=run=} (_dialect._) = {ränne}, (might), would run _or_ flow.

{=rund=}, round, spherical.

{=rü´stig=}, brisk(ly), vigorous(ly), active(ly).

{=rut´schen=}, to glide, to slip.


{=S.=}

{=Sach´=}, _f._ = {Sache}.

{=Sa´che=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), matter, affair; festivity.

{=Sack=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), bag, oil-cloth bag.

{=sa´gen=}, to say, to tell, to assert.

{=sah nach=}, _see_ {nachsehen}.

{=Sai´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), chord, string.

{=Sal´be=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), salve, liniment.

{=Salz´kammergut=}, _n._, name of an Austrian crown-land.

{=sämt´liche=}, all, as a whole.

{=San´cho Pan´sa=} (_a Spanish name_), Sancho Panza.

{=Sand´hase=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), hare living in sandy regions.

{=sanft=}, soft, gentle.

{=Sän´ger=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), singer.

{=Sän´gerin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), (female) singer, sweet singer, the
girl who just had sung.

{=Sankt=}, Saint, St.

{=saß=}; {=sa´ßen=}, _see_ {sitzen}.

{=sau´er=}, sour; hard, troublesome; {es fällt mir sauer}, it costs me
great pains.

{=sau´sen=}, to hurry, to steam.

{=schaf´fens?=} (_dialect._) = {wünschen Sie?} _or_ {wollen Sie?}

{=schal´len=}, to sound.

{=schau´derhaft=}, horrible, dreadful.

{=schau´en=}, to look (at, {auf},) to direct one’s eyes (to, {auf}).

{=schau´en ... herun´ter=}, _see_ {herunterschauen}.

{=schaun’s ... aus=} (_dialect._) = {schauen Sie aus}, _see_
{ausschauen}.

{=schau´rig=}, awful, dreadful; {schauriges}, dreadful things _or_
reports.

{=schaut aus=}, _see_ {ausschauen}.

{=schau´te ... drein=}, _see_ {dreinschauen}.

{=schau´te ... hin=}, _see_ {hinschauen}.

{=schau´te hinaus´=}, _see_ {hinausschauen}.

{=schau´te ... nach=}, _see_ {nachschauen}.

{=schau´ten ... auf=}, _see_ {aufschauen}.

{=schei´den= (schied, geschieden)}, _intrans._, to part, to separate.

{=schei´nen= (schien, geschienen)}, to seem, to appear.

{=schen´ken=}, to give, to present.

{=scher´zen=}, to make _or_ poke fun.

{=schi´cken=}, to send, to forward.

{=Schim´mer=}, _m._, gleam.

{=schim´mern=}, to glisten.

{=Schlaf=}, _m._, sleep, slumber.

{=schla´fen= (schlief, geschlafen)}, to sleep; {mit dem Schlafen}, as
to sleeping.

{=schla´gen= (schlug, geschlagen)}, to beat, to strike; {aus der Art
schlagen}, to degenerate; {nicht aus der Art schlagen}, to take after
one’s family; {eine Brücke schlagen}, to build _or_ to throw a bridge;
{wie viel Uhr hat es geschlagen?} what time is it?

{=schlahn=} (_dialect._) = {schlagen}, to beat, to strike, “to blow”
(_Longfellow_).

{=schlei´chen= (schlich, geschlichen)}, to steal away.

{=Schlei´er=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), veil.

{=schlep´pen,= =sich=}, to be burdened.

{=schlie´ßen= (schloß, geschlossen)}, to close, to conclude, to
finish.

{=schließ´lich=}, finally.

{=schlimm=}, bad.

{=schlimm´ste= (das)}, worst.

{=schlin´gen= (schlang, geschlungen)}, to sling, to wind, to twine, to
twist.

{=schlug ... zusam´men=}, _see_ {zusammenschlagen}.

{=Schlum´mer=}, _m._, slumber, sleep.

{=schlum´merlos=}, sleepless, wakeful.

{=Schlüs´sel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), key.

{=Schluß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), close, end; {am Schluß}, at the
close.

{=schme´cken=}, to taste; {es schmeckt mir}, I enjoy a dish; {ich
lasse es mir vortrefflich schmecken}, I do full justice to my meal.

{=Schmerz=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), pain, grief.

{=schmet´tern=}, to ring, to clang.

{=Schmied=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), blacksmith.

{=schmie´den=}, to fabricate, to plot, to concoct.

{=schmun´zeln=}, to smile, to smirk.

{=Schnee=}, _m._, snow.

{=Schnee´treiben=}, _n._, snow-drift, heavy snow-fall.

{=schnell=}, quick(ly), prompt(ly).

{=schnitt ... ab=}, _see_ {abschneiden}.

{=Schnur=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), string.

{=schob ... zurück´=}, _see_ {zurückschieben}.

{=schon=}, already; (_explet._) readily; beyond doubt, sure enough.

{=schön=}, beautiful, handsome, fair.

{=Schrank=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), case, press, wardrobe.

{=schrei´ben= (schrieb, geschrieben)}, to write; {Einem etwas
schreiben lassen}, to have something communicated to one.

{=Schrei´hals=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), cry-baby, screamer.

{=schrei´ten= (schritt, geschritten)}, to step, to stride.

{=Schritt=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), foot, step, pace; {auf tausend
Schritt}, at (a distance of) a thousand feet.

{=schritt ... zu=}, _see_ {zuschreiten}.

{=Schuh=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), shoe.

{=Schuld=}, _f._, fault; {Sie sind schuld}, it is your fault, you are
the cause of.

{=Schul´szepter=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), school-discipline,
school-regulations.

{=Schüs´sel=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), dish, platter, plate.

{=schüt´teln=}, to shake.

{=schwach=}, weak, feeble.

{=Schwan=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), swan, (= {„Zum Schwan“},) “The
Swan-Inn.”

{=Schwei´gen=}, _n._, silence.

{=schwei´gen= (schwieg, geschwiegen)}, to be _or_ to become silent, to
be without a word.

{=schweig´sam=}, quiet, silent, taciturn.

{=Schweiß=}, _m._, perspiration.

{=Schweiz=}, _f._, Switzerland.

{=schwer=}, heavy, oppressive, difficult, hard, troublesome,
stupefying; {das Reden wurde ihr schwer}, she found it hard to talk.

{=Schwe´re=}, _f._, weight, heaviness.

{=Schwe´ster=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), sister.

{=See=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), lake.

{=See´le=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), soul.

{=see´lenvoll=}, soul-breathing, congenial (in soul _or_ mind),
soul-gladdening.

{=seg´nen=}, to bless, to praise.

{=se´hen= (sah, gesehen)}, to see.

{=sehr=}, much, very much, exceedingly.

{=sei! seid!=} (_imperat._), be!

1. {=sein,= =sei´ne,= =sein=}, his, its.

2. {=sein= (war, gewesen)}, (_auxil. verb_), to be.

{=seit=} (_dat._), since, for.

{=Sei´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), side; {zu seiner Seite}, by his side;
{nach allen Seiten}, in every direction; {von Seiten}, on the part.

{=sel´ber= = selbst}.

{=selbst=}, (_my-, your-, his-, her-, our-, your-, them-_) self _or_
selves.

{=selbst´gesponnen=} (_p.p._), self-spun, home-made.

{=Selbst´hilfe=}, _f._, self-help; {Verein „Selbsthilfe“}, club “Help
Yourself!”

{=Sen´ne=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), Alpine herds-man.

{=Sen´nerin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), Alpine dairy-maid.

{=set´zen,= =sich=}, to sit down, to take a seat (by the side of,
{zu}).

{=setz´ten ... ein=}, _see_ {einsetzen}.

{=sich=} (_reflex. pron._), (_him-, her-, your-, them-_) self _or_
selves.

{=si´cher=}, firm(ly), steady (-ily), delicate(ly).

{=Si´cherheit=}, _f._, firmness, stability; {Gefühl der Sicherheit},
security.

{=sie=} she, (her), it; they (them).

{=Sie=} (_in address_), you.

{=Sie´bensachen=} (= {sieben Sachen},) (_pl._), things, traps, bag and
baggage.

{=sieb´zehn=}, seventeen.

{=Signo´ra=}, _f._ (_Ital._), (young) lady.

{=sil´bern=}, silver, of silver.

{=sin´gen= (sang, gesungen)}, to sing.

{=singt´s!=} (_dialect._) = {singt!}

{=sin´ken= (sank, gesunken)}, to sink, to fall.

{=Sinn=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), sense, mind.

{=Sitz=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), seat.

{=sit´zen= (saß, gesessen)}, to sit, to be seated; {zu sitzen kommen},
to be seated, to have a seat assigned.

{=Skorpion´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), scorpion.

{=so=}, so, so much, so very much; thus, therefore; in such a manner;
{so dir geschenkt was (war)}, if there was given to you.

{=sofort´=}, immediately, presently.

{=solch=}, such.

{=soll,= =soll´te=}, shall, should (could, might, ought).

{=sol´len=}, shall, to have to, to be to; to be said to.

{=sollt´=} (= {sollte},) should, would.

{=Som´merfrische=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), summer-trip.

{=Som´mernacht=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), summer-night.

{=son´dern=}, but (_after a negative clause_).

{=Son´nenschein=}, _m._, sun-light, sun-beam.

{=son´nig=}, sunny, sun-shiny; {sonnig und wonnig}, _perhaps_: “sunny
and funny.”

{=sonst=}, else, otherwise, usually, as a rule, in other respects; at
other times; apart from this; {sonst etwas}, anything else.

{=sor´gen=}, to care (for, {für},) to look (after, {für},) to see (to,
{für}).

{=so´weit=}, as far as, so far, so much.

{=Spaß´vogel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈}), wag, merry Andrew.

{=spät, spä´ter=}, late, later.

{=spie´len=}, to play.

{=Spin´nerin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), (female) spinner, girl by the
spinning-wheel.

{=Spinn´rocken=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), distaff, (={Spinn´rad})
spinning-wheel.

{=spitz=}, pointed, tapering.

{=spi´tzen=}, to point, to sharpen; {die Ohren spi´tzen}, to prick up
one’s ears.

{=spi´tzig=}, pointed, tapering.

{=Spleen=}, _m._ (_English_), spleen.

{=Sprache=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), speech, accent.

{=sprechen=}, ({sprach, gesprochen},) to speak, to talk.

{=Spur=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), trace.

{=Staatsprüfung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), state-examination, final
examination; {die Staatsprüfung machen}, to go in for the
state-examination.

{=Stadt=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), city.

{=Stadt´leute=}, _pl._, city-folks; {d’ Stadtleut’} (_dialect._)
= {die Stadtleute}.

{=stahn=} (_dialect._) = {stehen}, to stand.

{=Stamm=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), trunk, tree.

{=stäm´mig=}, sturdy.

{=Stand=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), station, standing.

{=Ständ´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), serenade; {Einem ein Ständchen
bringen}, to serenade one; {bei Ständchen}, at serenades.

{=standhaft=}, steadfast, persevering.

{=stark=}, mighty (-ily), intensive(ly), strong(ly); good, measured
(an hour); (_adv._) much.

{=stär´ken=}, to strengthen; {sich stärken}, to grow stronger.

{=ste´chen=}, ({stach, gestochen},) to sting, to run through.

{=ste´cken=}, to put, to place.

{=Steck´nadel=}, _f._ (_pl._ -{n},) pin.

{=steck´ten ... zusam´men=}, _see_ {zusammenstecken.}

{=ste´hen= (stand, gestanden)}, to stand, to be standing, to be
planted, to be written; {bereit stehen}, to be available; {zu Einem
stehen wie}, to stand by one as a ..., to be with one on terms of ...;
{zur Verfügung stehen}, to be at one’s disposal; {stehen bleiben}, to
stop.

{=steh´len= (stahl, gestohlen)}, to steal.

{=Stei´erische(r)=}, _m._, _see_ {Steirer}.

{=stei´gen=}, ({stieg, gestiegen},) to step in, to get in, to enter.

{=Stei´rer=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Styrian, inhabitant of the Austrian
crownland of Styria; a country-dance in Styria.

{=steil=}, steep.

{=stel´len=}, to put, to place; {in Aussicht stellen}, to hold out a
prospect.

{=stellte ... vor=}, _see_ {vorstellen.}

{=Stell´wagen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), stagecoach, diligence.

{=stem´peln=}, to stamp, to mark.

{=ster´ben= (starb, gestorben)}, to die.

{=stie´gen ... zu=}, _see_ {zusteigen}.

{=still=}, still, silent(ly), quiet(ly), low(ly), humble (-bly); {im
stillen}, privately, by one’s self; {still stehen}, to stop.

{=stil´le= = still}.

{=Stil´le=}, _f._, quietness, stillness; {in der Stille}, quietly.

{=Stim´me=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), voice; part (_in vocal or instrumental
music_).

{=stim´men=}, to tune (_a musical instrument_.)

{=Stirn=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), forehead, brow.

{=sto´cken=}, to stop, to cease.

{=Stock´werk=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), story (of a house).

{=Stor´chenfett=}, _n._, stork-suet.

{=Storch´fetttopf=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), (pot) jar with stork-suet,
stork-suet box.

{=Stoß=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), stroke; {der letzte Stoß}, finishing
stroke.

{=Stra´ße=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), street.

{=Stra´ßenecke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), street-corner.

{=Streich=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), trick, freak.

{=stri´cken=}, to knit; {es wird gestrickt}, some knitting is done.

{=Strick´körbchen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), work-basket.

{=Stroh=}, _n._, straw.

{=Strom=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), river, torrent, current; {in
Strömen}, in torrents.

{=Strumpf=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), (worsted) stocking.

{=Stüb´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), little room, chamber, garret.

{=Stu´be=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), room; {in der Stuben} (_dialectic_,
_dat. sing._), indoors.

{=Stu´benmädchen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), chamber-maid.

{=Student´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), student, undergraduate, collegian.

{=Studen´tengeschichte=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), story from college-life.

{=Studen´tenlied=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), college-song.

{=Stu´dio=}, _m._ (_abbrev. of Lat._ {Studiosus}), _pl._ {-s},
student, collegian.

{=Stu´dium=}, _n._ (_pl._ {Studien}), study.

{=Stuhl=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), chair.

{=stumm=}, silent, without (saying) a word.

{=Stun´de=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), hour.

{=stun´denlang=} (_adj._), lasting one or more hours; (_adv._) for
hours.

{=stür´men=}, to storm.

{=stü´tzen=}, to rest, to support.

{=subtrahie´ren=}, to subtract.

{=su´chen=}, to look for, to occupy.

{=such´te ... aus=}, _see_ {aussuchen}.

{=Sü´den=}, _m._, south; {nach Süden}, (towards the) south.

{=Sum´me=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), sum _or_ amount (_of money_).

{=süß=}, sweet.


{=T.=}

{=Tag=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), day.

{=Takt=}, _m._, tact, right feeling.

{=Tan´ne=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), fir-tree.

{=Tan´nenbaum=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), fir-tree.

{=Tan´te=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), aunt.

{=Tanz=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), dance.

{=tanzen=}, to dance; {der Tanzende}, dancer.

{=Ta´schentuch=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), pocket-handkerchief.

{=Tau´ern= = die hohen Tauern}, _pl._, High Tauern Mountains.

{=Tau´ernhaus=}, _n._, “High Tauern Inn,” Summit House.

{=Tau´ernwirt=}, _m._, host _or_ landlord of the “High Tauern Inn.”

{=tau´send=}, thousand; {was tausend!} (_interj._) the deuce! Good
Gracious!

{=tau´sendmal=}, (a) thousand times.

{=Teil=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), part, share; {zu teil werden}, to fall to
one’s share, to be granted _or_ bestowed.

{=tei´len=}, to divide, to part; {sich teilen}, to share; to divide
itself, to fork.

{=Tenor´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), tenor; {hoher Tenor}, upper tenor.

{=Terzett´=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), terzetto, trio.

{=teu´er=} (_attrib._ {teurer, teure, teures}), dear (dearest);
expensive.

{=Tha´rau=}, Tharau (_fictitious name_).

{=that ... weh=}, _see_ {wehthun}.

{=thät´s=} (_condit._, _dialect._ = {würde thun} _or_ {würde}), would.

{=Thee=}, _m._, tea.

{=Thee´kessel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), tea-kettle.

{=Thor=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), (city-)gate; {vor die Thore}, outside the
city-gates.

{=Thrä´ne=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), tear.

{=thun= (that, gethan)}, to do, to work, to busy one’s self.

{=Thür(e)=}, _f._ (_pl._ {Thüren}), door.

{=thut´s=} (_dialect._) = {thut}; {kennen thut’s kein Mensch}
(_dialect._) = {kein Mensch erkennt Sie}.

{=tief=}, deep(ly), profound(ly), lively (conversation).

{=Tier´welt=}, _f._ animal world, animal kingdom.

{=Tisch=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), table.

{=Toch´ter=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈}), daughter.

{=Töch´terlein=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), beloved daughter, darling
daughter.

{=Tod=}, _m._, death.

{=To´desnachricht=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), news of some one’s death.

{=toll=}, frantic, nonsensical.

{=Ton=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), tone, tune, sound of one’s voice.

{=topp!=} (_interj._), done! agreed!

{=Trabant´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-en}), follower.

{=tra´fen ... zusam´men=}, _see_ {zusammentreffen}.

{=traf´s=} (_dialect._) = {träf(e) es}, might (could) hit it.

{=tra´gen= (trug, getragen)}, to carry, to bear, to wear.

{=Trag´weite=}, _f._, range (of a gun).

{=trau´en=}, to trust (to, _dat._), to rely (upon, _dat._).

{=Traum=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), dream; {schwerer Traum}, oppressive
dream.

{=trau´rig=}, dreary, wretched.

{=tref´fen= (traf, getroffen)}, to strike, to hit; {sich treffen}, to
meet (one another).

{=trei´ben= (trieb, getrieben)}, to drive, to carry on, to deal, to
do, to urge on, to compel.

{=tren´nen=}, to separate, to part; {sich trennen}, to part with _or_
from one another.

{=treu=}, true (truly), faithful(ly), devoted(ly).

{=treu´herzig=}, true-hearted, sincere.

{=trin´ken= (trank, getrunken)}, to drink.

{=tro´cken=}, dry(ly), cool(ly).

{=trock´nen=}, to dry, to get dry.

{=Trost=}, _m._, solace, relief, comfort; {recht bei Trost sein}, to
be in one’s right mind.

{=trö´sten=}, to relieve, to cheer.

{=trotz=} (_genit._), in spite of.

{=trotzdem´=}, nevertheless; (= {trotzdem daß},) although.

{=Ty´phus=}, _m._, typhus (-fever).

{=Tyro´ler=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Tyrolese, inhabitant of Tyrol; {roter
Tyroler}, (home-grown) claret of Tyrol.

{=Tyro´lerhut=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), Tyrolese hat, Alpine hat.


{=U.=}

{=ü´bel=}, evil, ill, bad, amiss; {nicht so ganz übel sein}
(_colloq._), to be not amiss, _analog._, to be not half bad.

{=ü´ber=} (_dat._, _accus._), over, above, across, by way of, about,
regarding, as to, at; {über Venedig}, by way of (“via”) Venice.

{=überfal´len= (überfiel, überfallen)}, to attack.

{=ü´bergehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to pass over; to change, to turn,
(into, in).

{=überhaupt´=}, generally, usually, in general, as a rule, altogether,
for the rest.

{=überle´ben=}, to survive.

{=ü´bernächtig=}, nightly, nocturnal, night-; {übernächtige Arbeit},
nocturnal study, lucubration.

{=Uhr=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), clock, watch, (timepiece), time, o’clock;
{wie viel Uhr?} what time? {um vier Uhr}, at four o’clock.

{=um=} (_accus._), around, about, concerning, for, at (_time_);
(_conj._), in order to, to; {um ... willen}, for the sake of; {um ...
so hübscher}, all the more pretty; {um sechs}, at six o’clock; {ums =
um das}.

{=Um´gang=}, _m._, intercourse.

{=um´hängen=}, to hang round _or_ about (the shoulders).

{=um´kehren=}, to turn round, to return, to go back; {rechts
umgekehrt!} right about face!

{=ums= = um das}.

{=umschlin´gen= (umschlang, umschlungen)}, to clasp round, to embrace,
to cling (to, _accus._).

{=umsonst´=}, for nothing, gratis.

{=um´wenden= (wandte, gewandt)}, to turn _or_ to face round (to,
{nach}).

{=um´werfen= (warf, geworfen)}, to get out (_of singers_); {wir warfen
beinahe um}, we had a narrow escape of getting out.

{=un´bedacht=} (_or_ {unbedacht´}), _p.p._, thoughtless(ly),
inadvertent(ly).

{=un´belästigt=} (_or_ {unbelä´stigt}), _p.p._, unmolested,
unpestered.

{=un´bemittelt=} (_p.p._), impecunious, without means.

{=und=}, and.

{=un´ermüdlich=} (_or_ {unermüd´lich}), indefatigable.

{=un´eröffnet=} (_or_ {uneröff´net}), _p.p._, unopened, not broken
open.

{=un´gefähr=}, about, approximately.

{=un´gemein=}, uncommon, rare, extraordinary.

{=un´gewohnt=} (_or_ {ungewohnt´}), _p.p._, unwonted, unaccustomed,
unusual.

{=Universitäts´jahre=}, _pl._, college-years.

{=uns=} (_dat._, _accus._), to us, us.

{=Un´schuld=}, _f._, innocence.

{=un´ser,= =un´sere,= =un´ser=}, our.

{=un´sereiner,= =un´sereine,= =un´sereins=}, one of us, such as we,
our like.

{=un´sichtbar=}, invisible, scarce; {sich in L. unsichtbar machen}
(_colloq._), to leave L.

{=un´ten=} (_adv._), below, down there; {von unten}, from the valley.

{=un´ter=} (_dat._, _accus._), under, below, beneath; among (of a
number), {unter´m = unter dem}.

{=unterhal´ten= (unterhielt, unterhalten)}, {=sich=}, to converse.

{=un´terkimmet=} (_dialect._) = {unterkämen} _or_ {unterkommen
würden}, should (could) find shelter.

{=Un´terkunft=}, _f._, shelter, accommodation.

{=unter´m= = unter dem}.

{=unterwegs´=}, on the way.

{=un´verändert=} (_or_ {unverän´dert}), _p.p._, unchanged, the same.

{=un´vergeßlich=} (_or_ {unvergeß´lich}), not (never) to be forgotten.

{=un´vermerkt=} (_or_ {unvermerkt´}), _p.p._, unperceived, (_adv._),
unawares.

{=un´vermutet=} (_or_ {unvermu´tet}), _p.p._, unexpected(ly).

{=Un´wetter=}, _n._, bad (cruel) weather.

{=un´zerreißbar=} (_or_ {unzerreiß´bar}), untearable (-ly),
inextinguishable (-bly).

{=Ur´laub=}, _m._, leave of absence.

{=Ur´teil=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), judgment, opinion.

{=Utensi´lien=}, _pl._, utensils, implements; supply.


{=V.=}

{=Va´terland=}, _n._, fatherland.

{=Vene´dig=}, Venice.

{=veran´stalten=}, to get up, to arrange.

{=verar´beiten=}, to beat, to thrash, to belabor.

{=verbei´ßen= (verbiß, verbissen)}, to suppress; {sich das Lachen
verbeißen}, to stifle a laugh.

{=verbeu´gen,= =sich=}, to bow, to make one’s obeisance (to, {gegen}).

{=verbie´ten= (verbot, verboten)}, to forbid.

{=Verbin´dung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), relation.

{=verblüfft´=}, (_p.p._), put out, struck all of a heap.

{=verdorrt´=} (_p.p._), withered.

{=verdutzt´=}, (_p.p._), puzzled, taken aback.

{=Verein´=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), association, club; {Verein
„Selbsthilfe,“} club “Help-Yourself.”

{=verei´nen,= =sich=}, to join, to concentrate (to, {zu}).

{=verei´nigen=}, to unite (= {vereinbaren},) to reconcile; {sich
vereinigen}, to come to an understanding with one’s self.

{=verein´samt=} (_p.p._), lonely, solitary.

{=Verfas´ser=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), author, writer.

{=verfol´gen=}, to follow up, to pursue.

{=Verfol´gung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), persecution, “oppression”
(_Longfellow_).

{=verfro´ren=} (_p.p._), frozen.

{=Verfü´gung=}, _f._, disposal; {zur Verfügung stehen}, to be at one’s
disposal.

{=Vergan’genheit=}, _f._, the past, things (time) past.

{=verge´ben= (vergab, vergeben)}, to forgive, to pardon.

{=Verge´bung=}, _f._, pardon; ({ich bitte}) {um Vergebung!} (I beg
your) pardon! pardon me!

{=verges´sen= (vergaß, vergessen)}, to forget, to leave behind.

{=Vergnü´gen=}, _n._ (_pl._, {Vergnügungen},) pleasure, delight,
pastime; {vor Vergnügen}, with joy.

{=vergnügt´=} (_p.p._), cheerful, joyous.

{=verhal´ten= (verhielt, verhalten)}, to keep back, to retain, to
suppress.

{=Verhand´lung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), debate, proceedings.

{=verkeh´ren=}, to commune, to associate.

{=verkehrt´=} (_p.p._), wrong.

{=Verklä´rung=}, _f._, bliss.

{=verklin´gen= (verklang, verklungen)}, to die away.

{=Verkno´tigung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), firm knitting, close tie, “as
links to the chain” (_Longfellow_).

{=verkrie´chen= (verkroch, verkrochen)}, {=sich=}, to creep into.

{=verlas´sen= (verließ, verlassen)}, to leave, to quit.

{=verle´gen=} (_p.p._), embarrassed, puzzled.

{=Verle´genheit=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), embarrassment, perplexity.

{=verlei´hen= (verlieh, verliehen)}, to give, to bestow (upon,
_dat._), to vest (in, _dat._).

{=Verletz´ung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), injury, hurt, lesion.

{=verlie´ren= (verlor, verloren)}, to lose; {sich verlieren}, to be
lost.

{=Verlo´bungszeit=}, _f._, time between betrothal and marriage.

{=vermei´den= (vermied, vermieden)}, to shun, to evade, to shirk.

{=Vermö´gen=}, _n._, property, competence.

{=verpa´cken=}, to pack, to pack up, to keep safe.

{=verpflich´tet=} (_p.p._), bound, obliged (to do, {zu}).

{=verpu´tzeln=} (_dialect._), to mask, to disguise.

{=verra´ten= (verriet, verraten)}, to disclose, to divulge, to let
out.

{=verrei´sen=}, to go on a journey; {verreist sein}, to be on a
journey.

{=Vers=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), verse, strophe, lines.

{=verschämt´=} (_p.p._), bashful, modest.

{=verschie´den=}, different(ly), differing, widely different,
separate(ly); {verschieden sein}, to differ.

{=verschö´nern=}, to beautify, to embellish, to make _or_ to render
more interesting.

{=verschwei´gen= (verschwieg, verschwiegen)}, to pass over in silence,
to suppress.

{=verschwin´den= (verschwand, verschwunden)}, to disappear, to leave.

{=verse´hen= (versah, versehen)}, {=sich=}, to expect, to be aware
(of, _accus._).

{=versin´ken= (versank, versunken)}, to be absorbed _or_ lost (in
thoughts, {in sich}).

{=versor´gen=}, to take care (of one, _accus._), to settle one.

{=verste´hen= (verstand, verstanden)}, to understand; {sich
verstehen}, to be a judge (of, {auf}).

{=versun´ken=} (_p.p._), absorbed (in thoughts).

{=verun´glücken=} to come to grief, to be lost.

{=verwei´gern=}, to refuse (some one, _dat._), something.

{=verwit´tert=} (_p.p._), weather-beaten.

{=verwun´dern=}, to surprise, to amaze; {sich verwundern}, to be
surprised.

{=verwün´schen=}, to curse, to wish at Jericho.

{=verzie´hen= (verzog, verzogen)}, {=sich=}, to withdraw, to retire.

{=verzie´ren=}, to adorn.

{=verzwei´felt=} (_p.p._), desperate, hopeless; {ein verzweifeltes
Gesicht machen}, to look desperate _or_ hopeless.

{=Vetturin´=}, _m._ (_Ital._, vetturi´no), hackney-coachman, cabman.

{=viel,= =vie´le=}, much; many; {wie viel Uhr?} what time?

{=vielleicht´=}, perhaps, probably.

{=vier=}, four.

{=vier´te= (der)}, fourth.

{=Viertelstun´de=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), quarter of an hour.

{=vier´zig=}, forty; {die Vierzig}, the age of between 40 and 50
years; the forties.

{=Virgil´=} _or_ {Virgi´lius}, Vergil.

{=Volks´lied=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), popular song, national song,
ballad.

{=voll=}, full (of, {von},) replete (with, {von},) complete.

{=vollauf´=} abundantly, plentifully.

{=vollen´den=}, to go through, to finish, to complete.

{=voll´ends=}, completely.

{=völ´lig=} (_adv._), full(y), complete(ly), altogether, very.

{=vom= = von dem}.

{=von=} (_dat._), of, from; by; {von ... her}, from.

{=vor=} (_dat._, _accus._), before, in front of; ago (_time_); on
account of, at; {vor sich haben}, to confront.

{=vorab´=} (_obsol._), first of all, particularly.

{=voran´=} (_dat._, _postpositive_), before, ahead, at the head of.

{=voran´schreiten= (schritt, geschritten)}, to precede (some one,
_dat._)

{=vorbei´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to pass (by).

{=vorher´=}, before.

{=vor´holen=}, to fetch out, to take in their midst.

{=vor´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to seem, to appear (to one, _dat._);
to be mentioned.

{=vorn=} (_adv._), in front, in the forepart.

{=Vor´namen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), Christian-name.

{=vorndran´=}, ahead of all.

{=vor´ne=}, in front, in the front-room.

{=vor´nehmen= (nahm, genommen)}, to execute, to perform.

{=Vor´sicht=}, _f._ care, prudence.

{=Vor´sorge=}, _f._, foresight, precaution; {zur Vorsorge}, as a
matter of precaution.

{=vor´sorglich=} (_adv._), carefully, as a precaution.

{=Vor´steherin=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-nen}), head-mistress, directrix.

{=vor´stellen=}, to introduce one (to, _dat._); {sich vorstellen}, to
introduce one’s self.

{=Vor´stellung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), introduction, presentation.

{=vortreff´lich=}, hearty (-ily), splendid(ly).

{=vorü´berziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, to pass by (one, {an}).

{=vor´wärts=}, forward(s)! onward! on!


{=W.=}

{=wach´sen= (wuchs, gewachsen)}, to grow; {wüchse!} would _or_ might
grow!

{=wa´cker=}, good, valiant, gallant.

{=Wa´gen=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), carriage, coach, stage-coach; {am Wagen
hin}, along the side of the stage-coach.

{=wa´gen=}, to risk, to dare, to undertake.

{=Wahl=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), choice.

{=wäh´len=}, to choose.

{=wahr=}, true; {nicht wahr?} is it not so?

{=wäh´rend=} (_genit._), during; (_conj._) while.

{=Wai´senkind=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), orphan (-child).

{=Wai´senknabe=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), orphan (-boy).

{=Wald=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), wood(s), forest.

{=Wald´ecke=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), edge of the wood.

{=Wand=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-̈e}), wall; {an der Wand}, along the wall.

{=wan´dern=}, to wander; to be taken, to be put _or_ packed.

{=Wan´ge=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), cheek.

{=wan´ken=}, to falter, to fail.

{=wann=}, when; {dann und wann}, (every) now and then, at times.

{=Wap´pen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), escutcheon, coat of arms.

{=war=}; {=wa´ren=}, _see auxil._ {sein}.

{=wär´= = wäre}, would be.

{=wä´ren= = würden sein}, would have; would be.

{=war´fen ... um=}, _see_ {umwerfen}.

{=warm=}, warm(ly), passionate(ly).

{=war´nen=}, to warn, to caution, to counsel prudence.

{=wär´s= = würde es sein}.

{=war´ten=}, to wait (for, {auf}).

{=was=}, what (= {etwas},) somewhat, something; {was noch}, what else.

{=was´sergeprüft=} (_p.p._), water-proof, water-tight.

{=Was´serglas=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), tumbler.

{=wat=} (_dialect._), what.

{=we´cken=}, to waken, to call (up).

{=Weck´schnitt=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), _or_ {Weckschnitte}, _f._ (_pl._
{-n}) (rhomb-shaped) slice of bread.

{=we´der=}, neither; {weder ... noch} (_correlat._), neither ... nor.

{=Weg=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), way, road.

{=weg=}, away; {weit weg}, far away.

{=weg´holen=}, to (fetch) call away.

{=weg´ziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, _intrans._ to move away.

{=weh´thun= (that, gethan)}, to ache, to give pain.

{=we´he=} (_adj._), aching, painful; {Einem wehe thun}, to hurt one’s
feelings.

{=we´hen=}, to blow, to wave.

{=weh´mütig=}, woeful(ly), doleful(ly).

{=weh´ren,= =sich=}, to resist.

{=Weib=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-er}), woman, wife.

{=Weib´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), (pretty) young wife.

{=weich=}, soft, gentle, mild.

{=wei´hen=}, to devote.

{=weil=}, because, as, since.

{=Wei´le=}, _f._, while, pause.

{=Wein=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), wine.

{=wei´nen=}, to weep, to shed tears.

{=Wei´se=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), manner, way; melody, air.

1. {=weiß=} (_adj._), white.

2. {=weiß=} (_verb_), _see_ {wissen}.

{=weit=}; {=wei´ter=}, far; further on; {nicht mehr weiter}, not any
further; {weiter ziehen}, to move on, to proceed.

{=wei´te= (der)}, wide.

{=wei´tere= (der)}, further; {ohne weiteres}, without any more ado,
without ceremony, off-hand.

{=wel´cher,= =wel´che,= =wel´ches=}, who, which; {welcher?} which?

{=wel´ken=}, to fade, to wither.

{=Welt=}, _f._, world; {auf der Welt}, in the (whole) world.

{=Welt´getümmel=}, _n._, bustle (turmoil, throng) of the world.

{=wen=}, whom.

{=wen´den= (wandte, gewandt)}, {=sich=}, to address (one, {an},) to
apply _or_ to appeal (to, {an}).

{=Wen´dung=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), turning-point, crisis.

{=we´nig=}; {=we´nige=}, little; a few.

{=wenn=}, if, when, whenever; {wie wenn}, as if.

{=wer=}, who, he who; {wer?} who? {wer ... der}, who.

{=wer´ben= (warb, geworben)}, to woo, to court (one, {um}).

{=wer´den=} ({wurde} [{ward}], {geworden},) to become, to turn out; _or
auxil. for the formation of the pass. voice and the fut., and the
cond. act._

{=wer´fen= (warf, geworfen)}, to throw, to cast.

{=Wer´fener=}, of (the town of) Werfen.

{=wert=}, worth, valuable, dear; {werthalten}, to esteem, to value.

{=Wet´ter=}, _n._ (bad) weather, “wild weather” (_Longfellow_).

{=Wet´terloch=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-̈er}), bad-weather-quarter.

{=wickeln=}, to wrap.

{=wie=}, as, like; how? {Wie heißen Sie?} what are you called? what
is your name?

{=wie´der=}, again.

{=Wie´dersehen=}, _n._, meeting again.

{=wiewohl´=}, although.

{=wild=}, wild, impetuous.

{=wild´fremd=} (_or_ {wildfremd´}), utterly strange, utter stranger.

{=will=}, _see_ wollen.

{=Wind=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), wind, breeze.

{=win´ken=}, to beckon (to, _dat._).

{=Win´ter=}, _m._ (_pl._ --), winter.

{=wir=}, we.

{=wirk´lich=}, real(ly), actual(ly), true (truly); {wirklich?} is that
so?

{=wirst=}, _see_ werden.

{=Wirt=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-e}), landlord.

{=Wirt´schaft=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), (_colloq._), doings, goings on.

{=wi´schen=}, to wipe.

{=wis´sen=} (_pres. t._, {weiß, weißt, weiß}; {wissen}, _etc._),
{wußte, gewußt}, to know; {er weiß nicht zu fragen}, he cannot tell;
{wisse!} you must know! let me tell you!

{=Wis´senschaft=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-en}), science, learning.

{=wit´tern=}, to scent.

{=wo=}, where (_place_), when (_time_).

{=Wo´che=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), week.

{=wo´chenlang=}, for weeks.

{=wo´gen=}, to wave, to surge.

{=woher´=} (_emphat._ {wo´her}), whence, from where.

{=wohin´=} (_emphat._ {wo´hin}), whither, where.

{=wohl=} (_adj._), agreeable, well, comforting, happy; {Einem wohl
thun}, to do one good; (_adv.[E-9]_), well, {ja wohl}, very well;
(_explet._) I think, perhaps, no doubt; {wohl aber}, but much more.

{=wohl´gefühlt=} (_p.p._), well-supplied.

{=wohl´gesetzt=} (_p.p._), well-turned, well-worded.

{=woh´nen=}, to live, to reside.

{=Wol´ke=}, _f_, (_pl._ {-n}), cloud.

{=wol´len=} (_pres. t._, {will, willst, will}; {wollen}, _etc._), to
wish, to want, will; to be about to.

{=womit´=} (_emphat._ {wo´mit}), wherewith with which, by which.

{=won´nig=}, delightful; {sonnig und wonnig}, _perhaps:_ “sunny and
funny.”

{=worin´=} (_emphat._ {wor´in}), in which, where.

{=Wort=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e} _or_ {-̈er}), word.

{=Wun´de=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), wound; {das beste für die Wunden},
balsam for (the) wounds.

{=Wun´der=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), wonder, surprise; {es nimmt mich
Wunder}, it is surprising (a surprise) to me; {seine blauen Wunder
sehen}, not to know whether one stands on his head or his heels.

{=wun´derbar=}, wondrous(ly), strange(ly), surprising(ly).

{=wün´schen=}, to wish, to desire.

{=Wür´de=}, _f._, dignity.

{=wür´de; wür´den=}, would, should.

{=wür´dig=}, worthy.

{=wuß´ten=}, _see_ {wissen}.


{=Z.=}

{=z’=} (_dialect._), = {zu}, to, too; {z’ lang}, too long.

{=zah´len=}, to pay, to settle.

{=zäh´len=}, to count over.

{=zart=}, delicate.

{=Ze´che=}, _f._, bill.

{=Zei´chen=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), sign, signboard, trade.

{=zei´gen=}, to show; {sich zeigen}, to show, to appear.

{=Zeit=}, _f_ (_pl._ -en), time, season.

{=Zet´tel=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), slip of paper, scrip.

{=Zeu´ge=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-n}), witness.

{=zie´hen= (zog, gezogen)}, _transit._, to pull, to draw; _intrans._
to move, to march, to pass, to spread.

{=Ziel=}, _n._ (_pl._ {-e}), place to go to, destination.

{=Zim´mer=}, _n._ (_pl._ {--}), room.

{=Zip´perlein=}, _n._, gout, podagra.

{=Zi´ther=}, _f._ (_pl._ {-n}), zithern, cithern.

{=Zi´thern=}, _f._ (_dialect._), = {Zither}.

{=zo´gen ... hervor´=}, _see_ {hervorziehen}.

{=z’samm=} (_dialect._) = {zusammen}, together, one another; {sich
z’sammfinden}, to find each other.

{=zu=} (_dat._), at, in; to, toward, in the direction of (_in the
latter sense following its case_); (_adv._) too; (_conj._) to, in
order to.

{=zu´bringen= (brachte, gebracht)}, to spend, to pass.

{=zu´cken=}, to jerk, to move up and down _or_ to and fro, to flash.

{=zuerst´=}, first.

{=zufrie´den=}, satisfied, pleased; {ich bin es zufrieden}, I have no
objection to it, all right!

{=Zug=}, _m._ (_pl._ {-̈e}) (= {Richtung}), direction, course,
motion; (= {Eisenbahnzug},) train, railroad-train; (= {Gesichtszug},)
feature, trait.

{=zu´gebracht=}, _see_ {zubringen}.

{=zugleich´=}, at the same time, simultaneously.

{=zu´hören=}, to listen; {jeder wer zuhört}, every one in the
audience.

{=Zu´kunft[E-10]=}, _f._, time to come; emergency, casuality.

{=zuletzt´=}, at last, finally.

{=zum= = zu dem}.

{=zün´d’t ... an=}, _see_ {anzünden}.

{=zur= = zu der}.

{=zurecht´=}, ready; {zurecht machen}, to prepare, to get up.

{=zurück=}, back, backwards.

{=zurück´geben= (gab, gegeben)}, to give back, to restore.

{=zurück´gehen= (ging, gegangen)}, to go back, to return.

{=zurück´kehren=}, to return.

{=zurück´kommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to return.

{=zurück´lassen= (ließ, gelassen)}, to leave behind.

{=zurück´schieben= (schob, geschoben)}, to push _or_ shove back.

{=zusam´men=}, together, assembled.

{=zusam´menfinden= (fand, gefunden)}, {sich}, to come together, to
meet, to find each other.

{=zusam´menfliegen= (flog, geflogen)}, to flock together.

{=Zusam´menhang=}, _m._, connection.

{=zusam´menkommen= (kam, gekommen)}, to come together, to be joined
_or_ united.

{=zusam´menrücken=}, _intrans._, to be placed together.

{=zusam´menschlagen= (schlug, geschlagen)}, to throw up one’s arms (in
astonishment).

{=zusam´menstecken=}, to put together.

{=zusam´mentreffen= (traf, getroffen)}, to meet.

{=zusam´menwehen=}, to blow together.

{=zu´schauen=}, to look on, to watch.

{=zu´schreiten= (schritt, geschritten)}, to step _or_ to walk (up to,
{auf ... zu}).

{=zu´sehen= (sah, gesehen)}, to look on, to witness.

{=zu´steigen= (stieg, gestiegen)}, to move _or_ to march on.

{=zu´stürmen=}, to storm on, to continue storming.

{=Zu´trauen=}, _n._, confidence (in, {zu}); {Zutrauen fassen}, to take
confidence.

{=zuvor´=}, before; {tags zuvor}, on the previous day.

{=zu´ziehen= (zog, gezogen)}, _intrans._, to march (towards, _dat._),
to proceed (in the direction of, _dat._).

{=zwan´zig=}, twenty; {die Zwanzig}, the twenties.

{=Zwan´ziger=}, _m._ (_pl._ {--}), twenty-kreutzer-piece (= 10
American cents), dime.

{=zwar=} (_explet._), it is true, certainly; {sie meinten zwar},
though they thought; {... aber}, yet.

{=zwei=}, two.

{=zwei´feln=}, to doubt.

{=zwei´mal=}, two times, twice.

{=zwei´te= (der)}, second, other.

{=zwi´schen=} (_dat._, _accus._), between.

{=zwischendrein´=}, in the (very) midst of them.

{=zwoa=} (_dialect._) = {zwei}, two.

{=zwölf=}, twelve.




ADVERTISEMENTS


{Heath’s Modern Language Series.}

=GERMAN GRAMMARS AND READERS.=


=Nix’s Erstes deutsches Schulbuch.= For primary classes. Illus. 202
pp. 35 cts.

=Joynes-Meissner German Grammar.= Half leather. $1.12

=Joynes’s Shorter German Grammar.= Part I of the above. 80 cts.

=Alternative Exercises.= Two sets. Can be used, for the sake of
change, instead of those in the _Joynes-Meissner_ itself. 54 pages. 15
cts.

=Joynes and Wesselhoeft’s German Grammar.= $1.12.

=Harris’s German Lessons.= Elementary Grammar and Exercises for a
short course, or as introductory to advanced grammar. Cloth. 60 cts.

=Sheldon’s Short German Grammar.= For those who want to begin reading
as soon as possible, and have had training in some other
languages. Cloth. 60 cts.

=Ball’s German Grammar.= 90 cts.

=Ball’s German Drill Book.= Companion to any grammar. 80 cts.

=Spanhoofd’s Lehrbuch der deutschen Sprache.= Grammar, conversation,
and exercises, with vocabularies, $1.00.

=Foster’s Geschichten und Märchen.= For young children. 25 cts.

=Guerber’s Märchen und Erzählungen, I.= With vocabulary and questions
in German on the text. Cloth. 162 pages. 60 cts.

=Guerber’s Märchen und Erzählungen, II.= With vocabulary.[E-11]
Follows the above or serves as independent reader. Cloth. 202
pages. 65 cts.

=Joynes’s Shorter German Reader.= 60 cts.

=Deutsch’s Colloquial German Reader.= 90 cts.

=Spanhoofd’s Deutsches Lesebuch.= 100 cts.

=Boisen’s German Prose Reader.= 90 cts.

=Huss’s German Reader.= 70 cts.

=Gore’s German Science Reader.= 75 cts.

=Harris’s German Composition.= 50 cts.

=Wesselhoeft’s Exercises.= Conversation and composition. 50 cts.

=Wesselhoeft’s German Composition.= 40 cts.

=Hatfield’s Materials for German Composition.= Based on _Immensee_ and
on _Höher als die Kirche_. Paper. 33 pages. Each, 12 cts.

=Horning’s Materials for German Composition.= Based on _Der
Schwiegersohn_, 32 pages. 12 cts. Part II only. 16 pages. 5 cts.

=Stüven’s Praktische Anfangsgründe.= A conversational beginning book
with vocabulary and grammatical appendix. Cloth. 203 pages. 70 cts.

=Krüger and Smith’s Conversation Book.= 40 pages. 25 cts.

=Meissner’s German Conversation.= 65 cts.

=Deutsches Liederbuch.= With music. 164 pages. 75 cts.

=Heath’s German Dictionary.= Retail price, $1.50.




{Heath’s Modern Language Series.}

=ELEMENTARY GERMAN TEXTS.=


=Grimm’s Märchen and Schiller’s Der Taucher= (van der Smissen). With
vocabulary. _Märchen_ in Roman Type. 45 cts.

=Andersen’s Märchen= (Super). With vocabulary. 50 cts.

=Andersen’s Bilderbuch ohne Bilder= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

=Campe’s Robinson der Jüngere= (Ibershoff). Vocabulary. 40 cts.

=Leander’s Träumereien= (van der Smissen). Vocabulary. 40 cts.

=Volkmann’s Kleine Geschichten= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

=Easy Selections for Sight Translation= (Deering). 15 cts.

=Storm’s Geschichten aus der Tonne= (Vogel). Vocabulary. 40 cts.

=Storm’s In St. Jürgen= (Wright). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

=Storm’s Immensee= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

=Storm’s Pole Poppenspäler= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 40 cts.

=Heyse’s Niels mit der offenen Hand= (Joynes). Vocab. and
exercises. 30 cts.

=Heyse’s L’Arrabbiata= (Bernhardt), With vocabulary. 25 cts.

=Von Hillern’s Höher als die Kirche= (Clary). Vocab. and exercises. 30
cts.

=Hauff’s Der Zwerg Nase.= No notes. 15 cts.

=Hauff’s Das kalte Herz= (van der Smissen). Vocab. Roman type. 40 cts.

=Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves.= No notes. 20 cts.

=Schiller’s Der Taucher= (van der Smissen). Vocabulary. 12 cts.

=Schiller’s Der Neffe als Onkel= (Beresford-Webb). Notes and vocab. 30
cts.

=Goethe’s Das Märchen= (Eggert). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

=Baumbach’s Waldnovellen= (Bernhardt). Six stories. Vocabulary. 35
cts.

=Spyri’s Rosenresli= (Boll). Vocabulary. 25 cts.

=Spyri’s Moni der Geissbub.= With vocabulary by H. A. Guerber. 25 cts.

=Zschokke’s Der zerbrochene Krug= (Joynes). Vocab. and exercises. 25
cts.

=Baumbach’s Nicotiana= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

=Elz’s Er ist nicht eifersüchtig.= With vocabulary by
Prof. B. Wells. 20 cts.

=Carmen Sylva’s Aus meinem Königreich= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 35
cts.

=Gerstäcker’s Germelshausen= (Lewis). Notes and vocabulary. 20 cts.

=Wichert’s Als Verlobte empfehlen sich= (Flom). Vocabulary. 25 cts.

=Benedix’s Nein= (Spanhoofd). Vocabulary and exercises. 25 cts.

=Benedix’s Der Prozess= (Wells). Vocabulary. 20 cts.

=Lambert’s Alltägliches.= Vocabulary and exercises. 75 cts.

=Der Weg zum Glück= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 40 cts.

=Mosher’s Willkommen in Deutschland.= Vocabulary and exercises. 75
cts.

=Blüthgen’s Das Peterle von Nürnberg= (Bernhardt). Vocabulary. 35 cts.

=Münchhausen: Reisen und Abenteuer= (Schmidt). Vocabulary. 30 cts.

======================================================================
Transcription Notes

[E-1] The original was punctuated thus: ,Ännchen von Tharau,’“!

[E-2] The original was punctuated thus: {„Das ist ein schönes
Volkslied, das müssen Sie mir geben. Aber was ist das „Verknotigung?“}

[E-3] See the entry for “Else” in the vocabulary.

[E-4] COMMA SPACE replaces SPACE OPEN-PAREN. There is no discernible
parenthetical comment.

[E-5] Missing period.

[E-6] Was avánti.

[E-7] The word “see” was not italicized.

[E-8] The original marked Nagel as _n._

[E-9] Missing period.

[E-10] Missing accent.

[E-11] The original capitalized “vocabulary”. Correct in 1900 edition.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Eingeschneit, by Emil Frommel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EINGESCHNEIT ***

***** This file should be named 21917-0.txt or 21917-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/9/1/21917/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, La Monte H.P. Yarroll, Markus
Brenner and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.ne


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
