Project Gutenberg's Eine Schwierigkeit der Psychoanalyse, by Sigmund Freud

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Eine Schwierigkeit der Psychoanalyse

Author: Sigmund Freud

Release Date: June 11, 2009 [EBook #29097]

Language: German

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCHWIERIGKEIT DER PSYCHOANALYSE ***




Produced by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [ Anmerkungen zur Transkription:

    Der Text stammt aus: Imago. Zeitschrift für Anwendung der
    Psychoanalyse auf die Geisteswissenschaften V (1917). S. 1-7.

    Schreibweise und Interpunktion des Originaltextes wurden übernommen.

    Im Original gesperrt gedruckter Text wurde mit _ markiert.
  ]




                Eine Schwierigkeit der Psychoanalyse[1].

                        Von SIGM. FREUD (Wien).

  [1] Zuerst in ungarischer Sprache abgedruckt in der Zeitschrift
  »_Nyugat_«, herausgegeben von H. _Ignotus_, Budapest 1917.


Ich will gleich zum Eingang sagen, daß ich nicht eine intellektuelle
Schwierigkeit meine, etwas, was die Psychoanalyse für das Verständnis
des Empfängers (Hörers oder Lesers) unzugänglich macht, sondern eine
affektive Schwierigkeit: etwas, wodurch sich die Psychoanalyse die
Gefühle des Empfängers entfremdet, so daß er weniger geneigt wird, ihr
Interesse oder Glauben zu schenken. Wie man merkt, kommen beiderlei
Schwierigkeiten auf dasselbe hinaus. Wer für eine Sache nicht genug
Sympathie aufbringen kann, wird sie auch nicht so leicht verstehen.

Aus Rücksicht auf den Leser, den ich mir noch als völlig unbeteiligt
vorstelle, muß ich etwas weiter ausholen: In der Psychoanalyse hat sich
aus einer großen Zahl von Einzelbeobachtungen und Eindrücken endlich
etwas wie eine Theorie gestaltet, die unter dem Namen der Libidotheorie
bekannt ist. Die Psychoanalyse beschäftigt sich bekanntlich mit der
Aufklärung und der Beseitigung der sogenannten nervösen Störungen. Für
dieses Problem mußte ein Angriffspunkt gefunden werden, und man
entschloß sich, ihn im Triebleben der Seele zu suchen. Annahmen über das
menschliche Triebleben wurden also die Grundlage unserer Auffassung der
Nervosität.

Die Psychologie, die auf unseren Schulen gelehrt wird, gibt uns nur sehr
wenig befriedigende Antworten, wenn wir sie nach den Problemen des
Seelenlebens befragen. Auf keinem Gebiet sind aber ihre Auskünfte
kümmerlicher als auf dem der Triebe.

Es bleibt uns überlassen, wie wir uns hier eine erste Orientierung
schaffen wollen. Die populäre Auffassung trennt Hunger und Liebe als
Vertreter der Triebe, welche das Einzelwesen zu erhalten, und jener,
die es fortzupflanzen streben. Indem wir uns dieser so nahe liegenden
Sonderung anschließen, unterscheiden wir auch in der Psychoanalyse die
Selbsterhaltungs- oder Ich-Triebe von den Sexualtrieben und nennen die
Kraft, mit welcher der Sexualtrieb im Seelenleben auftritt, _Libido_ --
sexuelles Verlangen -- als etwas dem Hunger, dem Machtwillen u. dgl. bei
den Ich-Trieben analoges.

Auf dem Boden dieser Annahme machen wir dann die erste bedeutungsvolle
Entdeckung. Wir erfahren, daß für das Verständnis der neurotischen
Erkrankungen den Sexualtrieben die weitaus größere Bedeutung zukommt,
daß die Neurosen sozusagen die spezifischen Erkrankungen der
Sexualfunktion sind. Daß es von der Quantität der Libido und von der
Möglichkeit, sie zu befriedigen und durch Befriedigung abzuführen,
abhängt, ob ein Mensch überhaupt an einer Neurose erkrankt. Daß die Form
der Erkrankung bestimmt wird durch die Art, wie der einzelne den
Entwicklungsweg der Sexualfunktion zurückgelegt hat, oder, wie wir
sagen, durch die Fixierungen, welche seine Libido im Laufe ihrer
Entwicklung erfahren hat. Und daß wir in einer gewissen, nicht sehr
einfachen Technik der psychischen Beeinflussung ein Mittel haben, manche
Gruppen der Neurosen gleichzeitig aufzuklären und rückgängig zu machen.
Den besten Erfolg hat unsere therapeutische Bemühung bei einer gewissen
Klasse von Neurosen, die aus dem Konflikt zwischen den Ich-Trieben und
den Sexualtrieben hervorgehen. Beim Menschen kommt es nämlich vor, daß
die Anforderungen der Sexualtriebe, die ja weit über das Einzelwesen
hinausgreifen, dem Ich als Gefahr erscheinen, die seine Selbsterhaltung
oder seine Selbstachtung bedrohen. Dann setzt sich das Ich zur Wehre,
versagt den Sexualtrieben die gewünschte Befriedigung, nötigt sie zu
jenen Umwegen einer Ersatzbefriedigung, die sich als nervöse Symptome
kundgeben.

Die psychoanalytische Therapie bringt es dann zustande, den
Verdrängungsprozeß einer Revision zu unterziehen und den Konflikt zu
einem besseren, mit der Gesundheit verträglichen Ausgang zu leiten.
Unverständige Gegnerschaft wirft uns dann unsere Schätzung der
Sexualtriebe als einseitig vor: Der Mensch habe noch andere Interessen
als die sexuellen. Das haben wir keinen Augenblick lang vergessen oder
verleugnet. Unsere Einseitigkeit ist wie die des Chemikers, der alle
Konstitutionen auf die Kraft der chemischen Attraktion zurückführt. Er
leugnet darum die Schwerkraft nicht, er überläßt ihre Würdigung dem
Physiker.

Während der therapeutischen Arbeit müssen wir uns um die Verteilung der
Libido bei dem Kranken bekümmern; wir forschen nach, an welche
Objektvorstellungen seine Libido gebunden ist, und machen sie frei, um
sie dem Ich zur Verfügung zu stellen. Dabei sind wir dazu gekommen, uns
ein sehr merkwürdiges Bild von der anfänglichen, der Urverteilung der
Libido beim Menschen zu machen. Wir mußten annehmen, daß zu Beginn der
individuellen Entwicklung alle Libido (alles erotische Streben, alle
Liebesfähigkeit) an die eigene Person geknüpft ist, wie wir sagen, das
eigene Ich besetzt. Erst später geschieht es in Anlehnung an die
Befriedigung der großen Lebensbedürfnisse, daß die Libido vom Ich auf
die äußeren Objekte überfließt, wodurch wir erst in die Lage kommen, die
libidinösen Triebe als solche zu erkennen und von den Ich-Trieben zu
unterscheiden. Von diesen Objekten kann die Libido wieder abgelöst und
ins Ich zurückgezogen werden.

Den Zustand, in dem das Ich die Libido bei sich behält, heißen wir
_Narzißmus_, in Erinnerung der griechischen Sage vom Jüngling
_Narzissus_, der in sein eigenes Spiegelbild verliebt blieb.

Wir schreiben also dem Individuum einen Fortschritt zu vom Narzißmus zur
Objektliebe. Aber wir glauben nicht, daß jemals die gesamte Libido des
Ichs auf die Objekte übergeht. Ein gewisser Betrag von Libido verbleibt
immer beim Ich, ein gewisses Maß von Narzißmus bleibt trotz
hochentwickelter Objektliebe fortbestehen. Das Ich ist ein großes
Reservoir, aus dem die für die Objekte bestimmte Libido ausströmt, und
dem sie von den Objekten her wieder zufließt. Die Objektlibido war
zuerst Ich-Libido und kann sich wieder in Ich-Libido umsetzen. Es ist
für die volle Gesundheit der Person wesentlich, daß ihre Libido die
volle Beweglichkeit nicht verliere. Zur Versinnlichung dieses
Verhältnisses denken wir an ein Protoplasmatierchen, dessen zähflüssige
Substanz Pseudopodien (Scheinfüßchen) aussendet, Fortsetzungen, in
welche sich die Leibessubstanz hineinerstreckt, die aber jederzeit
wieder eingezogen werden können, so daß die Form des Protoplasmaklümpchens
wieder hergestellt wird.

Was ich durch diese Andeutungen zu beschreiben versucht habe, ist die
_Libidotheorie_ der Neurosen, auf welche alle unsere Auffassungen vom
Wesen dieser krankhaften Zustände und unser therapeutisches Vorgehen
gegen dieselben begründet sind. Es ist selbstverständlich, daß wir die
Voraussetzungen der Libidotheorie auch für das normale Verhalten geltend
machen. Wir sprechen vom Narzißmus des kleinen Kindes und wir schreiben
es dem überstarken Narzißmus des primitiven Menschen zu, daß er an die
Allmacht seiner Gedanken glaubt und darum den Ablauf der Begebenheiten
in der äußeren Welt durch die Technik der Magie beeinflussen will.

Nach dieser Einleitung möchte ich ausführen, daß der allgemeine
Narzißmus, die Eigenliebe der Menschheit, bis jetzt drei schwere
Kränkungen von seiten der wissenschaftlichen Forschung erfahren hat.

a) Der Mensch glaubte zuerst in den Anfängen seiner Forschung, daß sich
sein Wohnsitz, die Erde, ruhend im Mittelpunkt des Weltalls befinde,
während Sonne, Mond und Planeten sich in kreisförmigen Bahnen um die
Erde bewegen. Er folgte dabei in naiver Weise dem Eindruck seiner
Sinneswahrnehmungen, denn eine Bewegung der Erde verspürt er nicht, und
wo immer er frei um sich blicken kann, findet er sich im Mittelpunkt
eines Kreises, der die äußere Welt umschließt. Die zentrale Stellung
der Erde war ihm aber eine Gewähr für ihre herrschende Rolle im Weltall
und schien in guter Übereinstimmung mit seiner Neigung, sich als den
Herrn dieser Welt zu fühlen.

Die Zerstörung dieser narzißtischen Illusion knüpft sich für uns an den
Namen und das Werk des Nik. _Kopernikus_ im sechzehnten Jahrhundert.
Lange vor ihm hatten die Pythagoräer an der bevorzugten Stellung der
Erde gezweifelt, und _Aristarch_ von Samos hatte im dritten
vorchristlichen Jahrhundert ausgesprochen, daß die Erde viel kleiner sei
als die Sonne und sich um diesen Himmelskörper bewege. Auch die große
Entdeckung des _Kopernikus_ war also schon vor ihm gemacht worden. Als
sie aber allgemeine Anerkennung fand, hatte die menschliche Eigenliebe
ihre erste, die _kosmologische_, Kränkung erfahren.

b) Der Mensch warf sich im Laufe seiner Kulturentwicklung zum Herren
über seine tierischen Mitgeschöpfe auf. Aber mit dieser Vorherrschaft
nicht zufrieden, begann er eine Kluft zwischen ihrem und seinem Wesen zu
legen. Er sprach ihnen die Vernunft ab und legte sich eine unsterbliche
Seele bei, berief sich auf eine hohe göttliche Abkunft, die das Band der
Gemeinschaft mit der Tierwelt zu zerreißen gestattete. Es ist
merkwürdig, daß diese Überhebung dem kleinen Kinde wie dem primitiven
und dem Urmenschen noch ferne liegt. Sie ist das Ergebnis einer späteren
anspruchsvollen Entwicklung. Der Primitive fand es auf der Stufe des
Totemismus nicht anstößig, seinen Stamm auf einen tierischen Ahnherrn
zurückzuleiten. Der Mythus, welcher den Niederschlag jener alten
Denkungsart enthält, läßt die Götter Tiergestalt annehmen, und die Kunst
der ersten Zeiten bildet die Götter mit Tierköpfen. Das Kind empfindet
keinen Unterschied zwischen dem eigenen Wesen und dem des Tieres; es
läßt die Tiere ohne Verwunderung im Märchen denken und sprechen; es
verschiebt einen Angsteffekt, der dem menschlichen Vater gilt, auf den
Hund oder auf das Pferd, ohne damit eine Herabsetzung des Vaters zu
beabsichtigen. Erst wenn es erwachsen ist, wird es sich dem Tiere soweit
entfremdet haben, daß es den Menschen mit dem Namen des Tieres
beschimpfen kann.

Wir wissen es alle, daß die Forschung Ch. _Darwins_, seiner Mitarbeiter
und Vorgänger, vor wenig mehr als einem halben Jahrhundert dieser
Überhebung des Menschen ein Ende bereitet hat. Der Mensch ist nichts
anderes und nichts besseres als die Tiere, er ist selbst aus der
Tierreihe hervorgegangen, einigen Arten näher, anderen ferner verwandt.
Seine späteren Erwerbungen vermochten es nicht, die Zeugnisse der
Gleichwertigkeit zu verwischen, die in seinem Körperbau wie in seinen
seelischen Anlagen gegeben sind. Dies ist aber die zweite, die
_biologische_ Kränkung des menschlichen Narzißmus.

c) Am empfindlichsten trifft wohl die dritte Kränkung, die
psychologischer Natur ist.

Der Mensch, ob auch draußen erniedrigt, fühlt sich souverän in seiner
eigenen Seele. Irgendwo im Kern seines Ichs hat er sich ein
Aufsichtsorgan geschaffen, welches seine eigenen Regungen und Handlungen
überwacht, ob sie mit seinen Anforderungen zusammenstimmen. Tun sie das
nicht, so werden sie unerbittlich gehemmt und zurückgezogen. Seine
innere Wahrnehmung, das Bewußtsein, gibt dem Ich Kunde von allen
bedeutungsvollen Vorgängen im seelischen Getriebe, und der durch diese
Nachrichten gelenkte Wille führt aus, was das Ich anordnet, ändert ab,
was sich selbständig vollziehen möchte. Denn diese Seele ist nichts
einfaches, vielmehr eine Hierarchie von über- und untergeordneten
Instanzen, ein Gewirre von Impulsen, die unabhängig voneinander zur
Ausführung drängen, entsprechend der Vielheit von Trieben und von
Beziehungen zur Außenwelt, viele davon einander gegensätzlich und
miteinander unverträglich. Es ist für die Funktion erforderlich, daß die
oberste Instanz von allem Kenntnis erhalte, was sich vorbereitet, und
daß ihr Wille überallhin dringen könne, um seinen Einfluß zu üben. Aber
das Ich fühlt sich sicher sowohl der Vollständigkeit und Verläßlichkeit
der Nachrichten als auch der Wegsamkeit für seine Befehle.

In gewissen Krankheiten, allerdings gerade bei den von uns studierten
Neurosen, ist es anders. Das Ich fühlt sich unbehaglich, es stößt auf
Grenzen seiner Macht in seinem eigenen Haus, der Seele. Es tauchen
plötzlich Gedanken auf, von denen man nicht weiß, woher sie kommen; man
kann auch nichts dazu tun, sie zu vertreiben. Diese fremden Gäste
scheinen selbst mächtiger zu sein als die dem Ich unterworfenen; sie
widerstehen allen sonst so erprobten Machtmitteln des Willens, bleiben
unbeirrt durch die logische Widerlegung, unangetastet durch die
Gegenaussage der Realität. Oder es kommen Impulse, die wie die eines
Fremden sind, so daß das Ich sie verleugnet, aber es muß sich doch vor
ihnen fürchten und Vorsichten gegen sie treffen. Das Ich sagt sich, das
ist eine Krankheit, eine fremde Invasion, es verschärft seine
Wachsamkeit, aber es kann nicht verstehen, warum es sich in so seltsamer
Weise gelähmt fühlt.

Die Psychiatrie bestreitet zwar für solche Vorfälle, daß sich böse,
fremde Geister ins Seelenleben eingedrängt haben, aber sonst sagt sie
nur achselzuckend: Degeneration, hereditäre Disposition,
konstitutionelle Minderwertigkeit! Die Psychoanalyse unternimmt es,
diese unheimlichen Krankheitsfälle aufzuklären, sie stellt sorgfältige
und langwierige Untersuchungen an, schafft sich Hilfsbegriffe und
wissenschaftliche Konstruktionen und kann dem Ich endlich sagen: »Es ist
nichts Fremdes in dich gefahren; ein Teil von deinem eigenen Seelenleben
hat sich deiner Kenntnis und der Herrschaft deines Willens entzogen.
Darum bist du auch so schwach in der Abwehr; du kämpfst mit einem Teil
deiner Kraft gegen den anderen Teil, kannst nicht wie gegen einen
äußeren Feind deine ganze Kraft zusammennehmen. Und es ist nicht einmal
der schlechteste oder unwichtigste Anteil deiner seelischen Kräfte, der
so in Gegensatz zu dir getreten und unabhängig von dir geworden ist. Die
Schuld, muß ich sagen, liegt an dir selbst. Du hast deine Kraft
überschätzt, wenn du geglaubt hast, du könntest mit deinen Sexualtrieben
anstellen, was du willst, und brauchtest auf ihre Absichten nicht die
mindeste Rücksicht zu nehmen. Da haben sie sich denn empört und sind
ihre eigenen dunklen Wege gegangen, um sich der Unterdrückung zu
entziehen, haben sich ihr Recht geschaffen auf eine Weise, die dir nicht
mehr recht sein kann. Wie sie das zustande gebracht haben, und welche
Wege sie gewandelt sind, das hast du nicht erfahren; nur das Ergebnis
dieser Arbeit, das Symptom, das du als Leiden empfindest, ist zu deiner
Kenntnis gekommen. Du erkennst es dann nicht als Abkömmling deiner
eigenen verstoßenen Triebe und weißt nicht, daß es deren
Ersatzbefriedigung ist.«

»Der ganze Vorgang wird aber nur durch den einen Umstand möglich, daß du
dich auch in einem anderen wichtigen Punkte im Irrtum befindest. Du
vertraust darauf, daß du alles erfährst, was in deiner Seele vorgeht,
wenn es nur wichtig genug ist, weil dein Bewußtsein es dir dann meldet.
Und wenn du von etwas in deiner Seele keine Nachricht bekommen hast,
nimmst du zuversichtlich an, es sei nicht in ihr enthalten. Ja, du gehst
so weit, daß du »seelisch« für identisch hältst mit »bewußt«, d. h. dir
bekannt, trotz der augenscheinlichsten Beweise, daß in deinem
Seelenleben beständig viel mehr vor sich gehen muß, als deinem
Bewußtsein bekannt werden kann. Laß dich doch in diesem einen Punkt
belehren! Das Seelische in dir fällt nicht mit dem dir Bewußten
zusammen; es ist etwas anderes, ob etwas in deiner Seele vorgeht und ob
du es auch erfährst. Für gewöhnlich, ich will es zugeben, reicht der
Nachrichtendienst an dein Bewußtsein für deine Bedürfnisse aus. Du
darfst dich in der Illusion wiegen, daß du alles wichtigere erfährst.
Aber in manchen Fällen, z. B. in dem eines solchen Triebkonfliktes,
versagt er und dein Wille reicht dann nicht weiter als dein Wissen. In
allen Fällen aber sind diese Nachrichten deines Bewußtseins
unvollständig und häufig unzuverlässig; auch trifft es sich oft genug,
daß du von den Geschehnissen erst Kunde bekommst, wenn sie bereits
vollzogen sind und du nichts mehr an ihnen ändern kannst. Wer kann,
selbst wenn du nicht krank bist, ermessen, was sich alles in deiner
Seele regt, wovon du nichts erfährst, oder worüber du falsch berichtet
wirst. Du benimmst dich wie ein absoluter Herrscher, der es sich an den
Informationen seiner obersten Hofämter genügen läßt und nicht zum Volk
herabsteigt, um dessen Stimme zu hören. Geh in dich, in deine Tiefen und
lerne dich erst kennen, dann wirst du verstehen, warum du krank werden
mußt, und vielleicht vermeiden, krank zu werden.«

So wollte die Psychoanalyse das Ich belehren. Aber die beiden
Aufklärungen, daß das Triebleben der Sexualität in uns nicht voll zu
bändigen ist, und daß die seelischen Vorgänge an sich unbewußt sind und
nur durch eine unvollständige und unzuverlässige Wahrnehmung dem Ich
zugänglich und ihm unterworfen werden, kommen der Behauptung gleich, daß
_das Ich nicht Herr sei in seinem eigenen Haus_. Sie stellen miteinander
die dritte Kränkung der Eigenliebe dar, die ich die _psychologische_
nennen möchte. Kein Wunder daher, daß das Ich der Psychoanalyse nicht
seine Gunst zuwendet und ihr hartnäckig den Glauben verweigert.

Die wenigsten Menschen dürften sich klar gemacht haben, einen wie
folgenschweren Schritt die Annahme unbewußter seelischer Vorgänge für
Wissenschaft und Leben bedeuten würde. Beeilen wir uns aber
hinzuzufügen, daß nicht die Psychoanalyse diesen Schritt zuerst gemacht
hat. Es sind namhafte Philosophen als Vorgänger anzuführen, vor allen
der große Denker _Schopenhauer_, dessen unbewußter »Wille« den
seelischen Trieben der Psychoanalyse gleichzusetzen ist. Derselbe Denker
übrigens, der in Worten von unvergeßlichem Nachdruck die Menschen an die
immer noch unterschätzte Bedeutung ihres Sexualstrebens gemahnt hat. Die
Psychoanalyse hat nur das eine voraus, daß sie die beiden dem Narzißmus
so peinlichen Sätze von der psychischen Bedeutung der Sexualität und von
der Unbewußtheit des Seelenlebens nicht abstrakt behauptet, sondern an
einem Material erweist, welches jeden einzelnen persönlich angeht und
seine Stellungnahme zu diesen Problemen erzwingt. Aber gerade darum
lenkt sie die Abneigung und die Widerstände auf sich, welche den großen
Namen des Philosophen noch scheu vermeiden.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Eine Schwierigkeit der Psychoanalyse, by 
Sigmund Freud

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCHWIERIGKEIT DER PSYCHOANALYSE ***

***** This file should be named 29097-8.txt or 29097-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/0/9/29097/

Produced by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
