The Project Gutenberg EBook of Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?, by 
Immanuel Kant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?

Author: Immanuel Kant

Release Date: December 31, 2009 [EBook #30821]

Language: German

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEANTWORTUNG DER FRAGE ***




Produced by Jana Srna and Philipp Zeinlinger





  [ Anmerkungen zur Transkription:

    Der Text stammt aus: Immanuel Kants Werke. Band IV. Schriften von
    1783-1788. Herausgegeben von Dr. Artur Buchenau und Dr. Ernst Cassirer.
    Berlin: Bruno Cassirer 1913. S. 167-176 und 538-539 (Lesarten).

    Schreibweise und Interpunktion des Originaltextes wurden übernommen;
    lediglich offensichtliche Druckfehler wurden korrigiert. Eine Liste
    der vorgenommenen Änderungen findet sich am Ende des Textes.

    Im Original gesperrt gedruckter Text wurde mit = markiert.
    Im Original kursiv gedruckter Text wurde mit _ markiert.
  ]




Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?


=Aufklärung ist der Ausgang des Menschen aus seiner selbstverschuldeten
Unmündigkeit.= =Unmündigkeit= ist das Unvermögen, sich seines Verstandes
ohne Leitung eines anderen zu bedienen. =Selbstverschuldet= ist diese
Unmündigkeit, wenn die Ursache derselben nicht am Mangel des Verstandes,
sondern der Entschließung und des Mutes liegt, sich seiner ohne Leitung
eines andern zu bedienen. _Sapere aude!_ Habe Mut, dich deines =eigenen=
Verstandes zu bedienen! ist also der Wahlspruch der Aufklärung.

Faulheit und Feigheit sind die Ursachen, warum ein so großer Teil der
Menschen, nachdem sie die Natur längst von fremder Leitung
freigesprochen (_naturaliter maiorennes_), dennoch gerne zeitlebens
unmündig bleiben; und warum es anderen so leicht wird, sich zu deren
Vormündern aufzuwerfen. Es ist so bequem, unmündig zu sein. Habe ich ein
Buch, das für mich Verstand hat, einen Seelsorger, der für mich Gewissen
hat, einen Arzt, der für mich die Diät beurteilt usw., so brauche ich
mich ja nicht selbst zu bemühen. Ich habe nicht nötig zu denken, wenn
ich nur bezahlen kann; andere werden das verdrießliche Geschäft schon
für mich übernehmen. Daß der bei weitem größte Teil der Menschen
(darunter das ganze schöne Geschlecht) den Schritt zur Mündigkeit, außer
dem daß er beschwerlich ist, auch für sehr gefährlich halte, dafür
sorgen schon jene Vormünder, die die Oberaufsicht über sie gütigst auf
sich genommen haben. Nachdem sie ihr Hausvieh zuerst dumm gemacht haben
und sorgfältig verhüteten, daß diese ruhigen Geschöpfe ja keinen Schritt
außer dem Gängelwagen, darin sie sie einsperreten, wagen durften, so
zeigen sie ihnen nachher die Gefahr, die ihnen drohet, wenn sie es
versuchen, allein zu gehen. Nun ist diese Gefahr zwar eben so groß
nicht, denn sie würden durch einigemal Fallen wohl endlich gehen lernen;
allein ein Beispiel von der Art macht doch schüchtern und schreckt
gemeiniglich von allen ferneren Versuchen ab.

Es ist also für jeden einzelnen Menschen schwer, sich aus der ihm
beinahe zur Natur gewordenen Unmündigkeit herauszuarbeiten. Er hat sie
sogar liebgewonnen und ist vorderhand wirklich unfähig, sich seines
eigenen Verstandes zu bedienen, weil man ihn niemals den Versuch davon
machen ließ. Satzungen und Formeln, diese mechanischen Werkzeuge eines
vernünftigen Gebrauchs oder vielmehr Mißbrauchs seiner Naturgaben, sind
die Fußschellen einer immerwährenden Unmündigkeit. Wer sie auch abwürfe,
würde dennoch auch über den schmalesten Graben einen nur unsicheren
Sprung tun, weil er zu dergleichen freier Bewegung nicht gewöhnt ist.
Daher gibt es nur wenige, denen es gelungen ist, durch eigene Bearbeitung
ihres Geistes sich aus der Unmündigkeit herauszuwickeln und dennoch einen
sicheren Gang zu tun.

Daß aber ein Publikum sich selbst aufkläre, ist eher möglich; ja es ist,
wenn man ihm nur Freiheit läßt, beinahe unausbleiblich. Denn da werden
sich immer einige Selbstdenkende, sogar unter den eingesetzten
Vormündern des großen Haufens finden, welche, nachdem sie das Joch der
Unmündigkeit selbst abgeworfen haben, den Geist einer vernünftigen
Schätzung des eigenen Werts und des Berufs jedes Menschen, selbst zu
denken, um sich verbreiten werden. Besonders ist hiebei: daß das
Publikum, welches zuvor von ihnen unter dieses Joch gebracht worden, sie
hernach selbst zwingt, darunter zu bleiben, wenn es von einigen seiner
Vormünder, die selbst aller Aufklärung unfähig sind, dazu aufgewiegelt
worden; so schädlich ist es, Vorurteile zu pflanzen, weil sie sich
zuletzt an denen selbst rächen, die oder deren Vorgänger ihre Urheber
gewesen sind. Daher kann ein Publikum nur langsam zur Aufklärung
gelangen. Durch eine Revolution wird vielleicht wohl ein Abfall von
persönlichem Despotism und gewinnsüchtiger oder herrschsüchtiger
Bedrückung, aber niemals wahre Reform der Denkungsart zustande kommen;
sondern neue Vorurteile werden, ebensowohl als die alten, zum Leitbande
des gedankenlosen großen Haufens dienen.

Zu dieser Aufklärung aber wird nichts erfordert als =Freiheit=; und zwar
die unschädlichste unter allem, was nur Freiheit heißen mag, nämlich
die: von seiner Vernunft in allen Stücken =öffentlichen Gebrauch= zu
machen. Nun höre ich aber von allen Seiten rufen: =Räsonniert nicht!=
Der Offizier sagt: Räsonniert nicht, sondern exerziert! Der Finanzrat:
Räsonniert nicht, sondern bezahlt! Der Geistliche: Räsonniert nicht,
sondern glaubt! (Nur ein einziger Herr in der Welt sagt: =Räsonniert=,
soviel ihr wollt und worüber ihr wollt, =aber gehorcht=!) Hier ist
überall Einschränkung der Freiheit. Welche Einschränkung aber ist der
Aufklärung hinderlich, welche nicht, sondern ihr wohl gar beförderlich?
-- Ich antworte: Der =öffentliche= Gebrauch seiner Vernunft muß
jederzeit frei sein, und der allein kann Aufklärung unter Menschen
zustande bringen; der =Privatgebrauch= derselben aber darf öfters sehr
enge eingeschränkt sein, ohne doch darum den Fortschritt der Aufklärung
sonderlich zu hindern. Ich verstehe aber unter dem öffentlichen Gebrauche
seiner eigenen Vernunft denjenigen, den jemand =als Gelehrter= von ihr
vor dem ganzen Publikum der =Leserwelt= macht. Den Privatgebrauch nenne
ich denjenigen, den er in einem gewissen ihm anvertrauten =bürgerlichen
Posten= oder Amte von seiner Vernunft machen darf. Nun ist zu manchen
Geschäften, die in das Interesse des gemeinen Wesens laufen, ein gewisser
Mechanism notwendig, vermittelst dessen einige Glieder des gemeinen
Wesens sich bloß passiv verhalten müssen, um durch eine künstliche
Einhelligkeit von der Regierung zu öffentlichen Zwecken gerichtet oder
wenigstens von der Zerstörung dieser Zwecke abgehalten zu werden. Hier
ist es nun freilich nicht erlaubt zu räsonnieren; sondern man muß
gehorchen. Sofern sich aber dieser Teil der Maschine zugleich als Glied
eines ganzen gemeinen Wesens, ja sogar der Weltbürgergesellschaft
ansieht, mithin in der Qualität eines Gelehrten, der sich an ein
Publikum im eigentlichen Verstande durch Schriften wendet, kann er
allerdings räsonnieren, ohne daß dadurch die Geschäfte leiden, zu denen
er zum Teile als passives Glied angesetzt ist. So würde es sehr
verderblich sein, wenn ein Offizier, dem von seinen Oberen etwas
anbefohlen wird, im Dienste über die Zweckmäßigkeit oder Nützlichkeit
dieses Befehls laut vernünfteln wollte; er muß gehorchen. Es kann ihm
aber billigermaßen nicht verwehrt werden, als Gelehrter über die Fehler
im Kriegesdienste Anmerkungen zu machen und diese seinem Publikum zur
Beurteilung vorzulegen. Der Bürger kann sich nicht weigern, die ihm
auferlegten Abgaben zu leisten; sogar kann ein vorwitziger Tadel solcher
Auflagen, wenn sie von ihm geleistet werden sollen, als ein Skandal,
(das allgemeine Widersetzlichkeiten veranlassen könnte), bestraft
werden. Ebenderselbe handelt demohngeachtet der Pflicht eines Bürgers
nicht entgegen, wenn er als Gelehrter wider die Unschicklichkeit oder
auch Ungerechtigkeit solcher Ausschreibungen öffentlich seine Gedanken
äußert. Ebenso ist ein Geistlicher verbunden, seinen Katechismusschülern
und seiner Gemeinde nach dem Symbol der Kirche, der er dient, seinen
Vortrag zu tun, denn er ist auf diese Bedingung angenommen worden. Aber
als Gelehrter hat er volle Freiheit, ja sogar den Beruf dazu, alle seine
sorgfältig geprüften und wohlmeinenden Gedanken über das Fehlerhafte in
jenem Symbol und Vorschläge wegen besserer Einrichtung des Religions-
und Kirchenwesens dem Publikum mitzuteilen. Es ist hiebei auch nichts,
was dem Gewissen zur Last gelegt werden könnte. Denn was er zufolge
seines Amts als Geschäftträger der Kirche lehrt, das stellt er als etwas
vor, in Ansehung dessen er nicht freie Gewalt hat, nach eigenem
Gutdünken zu lehren, sondern das er nach Vorschrift und im Namen eines
andern vorzutragen angestellt ist. Er wird sagen: unsere Kirche lehrt
dieses oder jenes; das sind die Beweisgründe, deren sie sich bedient. Er
zieht alsdann allen praktischen Nutzen für seine Gemeinde aus Satzungen,
die er selbst nicht mit voller Überzeugung unterschreiben würde, zu
deren Vortrag er sich gleichwohl anheischig machen kann, weil es doch
nicht ganz unmöglich ist, daß darin Wahrheit verborgen läge, auf alle
Fälle aber wenigstens doch nichts der innern Religion Widersprechendes
darin angetroffen wird. Denn glaubte er das letztere darin zu finden, so
würde er sein Amt mit Gewissen nicht verwalten können; er müßte es
niederlegen. Der Gebrauch also, den ein angestellter Lehrer von seiner
Vernunft vor seiner Gemeinde macht, ist bloß ein =Privatgebrauch=, weil
diese immer nur eine häusliche, obzwar noch so große Versammlung ist;
und in Ansehung dessen ist er als Priester nicht frei und darf es auch
nicht sein, weil er einen fremden Auftrag ausrichtet. Dagegen als
Gelehrter, der durch Schriften zum eigentlichen Publikum, nämlich der
Welt spricht, mithin der Geistliche im =öffentlichen Gebrauche= seiner
Vernunft, genießt einer uneingeschränkten Freiheit, sich seiner eigenen
Vernunft zu bedienen und in seiner eigenen Person zu sprechen. Denn daß
die Vormünder des Volks (in geistlichen Dingen) selbst wieder unmündig
sein sollen, ist eine Ungereimtheit, die auf Verewigung der
Ungereimtheiten hinausläuft.

Aber sollte nicht eine Gesellschaft von Geistlichen, etwa eine
Kirchenversammlung oder eine ehrwürdige Classis (wie sie sich unter den
Holländern selbst nennt), berechtigt sein, sich eidlich auf ein gewisses
unveränderliches Symbol zu verpflichten, um so eine unaufhörliche
Obervormundschaft über jedes ihrer Glieder und vermittelst ihrer über
das Volk zu führen und diese so gar zu verewigen? Ich sage: das ist ganz
unmöglich. Ein solcher Kontrakt, der auf immer alle weitere Aufklärung
vom Menschengeschlechte abzuhalten geschlossen würde, ist schlechterdings
null und nichtig; und sollte er auch durch die oberste Gewalt, durch
Reichstage und die feierlichsten Friedensschlüsse bestätigt sein. Ein
Zeitalter kann sich nicht verbünden und darauf verschwören, das folgende
in einen Zustand zu setzen, darin es ihm unmöglich werden muß, seine
(vornehmlich so sehr angelegentliche) Erkenntnisse zu erweitern, von
Irrtümern zu reinigen und überhaupt in der Aufklärung weiterzuschreiten.
Das wäre ein Verbrechen wider die menschliche Natur, deren ursprüngliche
Bestimmung gerade in diesem Fortschreiten besteht; und die Nachkommen
sind also vollkommen dazu berechtigt, jene Beschlüsse, als unbefugter
und frevelhafter Weise genommen, zu verwerfen. Der Probierstein alles
dessen, was über ein Volk als Gesetz beschlossen werden kann, liegt in
der Frage: ob ein Volk sich selbst wohl ein solches Gesetz auferlegen
könnte? Nun wäre dieses wohl, gleichsam in der Erwartung eines bessern,
auf eine bestimmte kurze Zeit möglich, um eine gewisse Ordnung
einzuführen: indem man es zugleich jedem der Bürger, vornehmlich dem
Geistlichen, frei ließe, in der Qualität eines Gelehrten öffentlich,
d. i. durch Schriften, über das Fehlerhafte der dermaligen Einrichtung
seine Anmerkungen zu machen, indessen die eingeführte Ordnung noch immer
fortdauerte, bis die Einsicht in die Beschaffenheit dieser Sachen
öffentlich so weit gekommen und bewähret worden, daß sie durch Vereinigung
ihrer Stimmen (wenngleich nicht aller) einen Vorschlag vor den Thron
bringen könnte, um diejenigen Gemeinden in Schutz zu nehmen, die sich
etwa nach ihren Begriffen der besseren Einsicht zu einer veränderten
Religionseinrichtung geeinigt hätten, ohne doch diejenigen zu hindern,
die es beim alten wollten bewenden lassen. Aber auf eine beharrliche,
von niemanden öffentlich zu bezweifelnde Religionsverfassung auch nur
binnen der Lebensdauer eines Menschen sich zu einigen, und dadurch einen
Zeitraum in dem Fortgange der Menschheit zur Verbesserung gleichsam zu
vernichten und fruchtlos, dadurch aber wohl gar der Nachkommenschaft
nachteilig zu machen, ist schlechterdings unerlaubt. Ein Mensch kann
zwar für seine Person und auch alsdann nur auf einige Zeit in dem, was
ihm zu wissen obliegt, die Aufklärung aufschieben; aber auf sie Verzicht
zu tun, es sei für seine Person, mehr aber noch für die Nachkommenschaft,
heißt die heiligen Rechte der Menschheit verletzen und mit Füßen treten.
Was aber nicht einmal ein Volk über sich selbst beschließen darf, das
darf noch weniger ein Monarch über das Volk beschließen; denn sein
gesetzgebendes Ansehen beruht eben darauf, daß er den gesamten
Volkswillen in dem seinigen vereinigt. Wenn er nur darauf sieht, daß
alle wahre oder vermeinte Verbesserung mit der bürgerlichen Ordnung
zusammenbestehe, so kann er seine Untertanen übrigens nur selbst machen
lassen, was sie um ihres Seelenheils willen zu tun nötig finden; das
geht ihn nichts an, wohl aber zu verhüten, daß nicht einer den andern
gewalttätig hindere, an der Bestimmung und Beförderung desselben nach
allem seinen Vermögen zu arbeiten. Es tut selbst seiner Majestät
Abbruch, wenn er sich hierin mischt, indem er die Schriften, wodurch
seine Untertanen ihre Einsichten ins reine zu bringen suchen, seiner
Regierungsaufsicht würdigt, sowohl wenn er dieses aus eigener höchsten
Einsicht tut, wo er sich dem Vorwurfe aussetzt: _Caesar non est supra
grammaticos_, als auch und noch weit mehr, wenn er seine oberste Gewalt
soweit erniedrigt, den geistlichen Despotism einiger Tyrannen in seinem
Staate gegen seine übrigen Untertanen zu unterstützen.

Wenn denn nun gefragt wird: leben wir jetzt in einem =aufgeklärten=
Zeitalter? so ist die Antwort: Nein, aber wohl in einem Zeitalter der
=Aufklärung=. Daß die Menschen, wie die Sachen jetzt stehen, im ganzen
genommen, schon imstande wären oder darin auch nur gesetzt werden
könnten, in Religionsdingen sich ihres eigenen Verstandes ohne Leitung
eines andern sicher und gut zu bedienen, daran fehlt noch sehr viel.
Allein, daß jetzt ihnen doch das Feld geöffnet wird, sich dahin frei zu
bearbeiten und die Hindernisse der allgemeinen Aufklärung oder des
Ausganges aus ihrer selbstverschuldeten Unmündigkeit allmählich weniger
werden, davon haben wir doch deutliche Anzeigen. In diesem Betracht ist
dieses Zeitalter das Zeitalter der Aufklärung oder das Jahrhundert
FRIEDERICHS.

Ein Fürst, der es seiner nicht unwürdig findet zu sagen, daß er es für
=Pflicht= halte, in Religionsdingen den Menschen nichts vorzuschreiben,
sondern ihnen darin volle Freiheit zu lassen, der also selbst den
hochmütigen Namen der =Toleranz= von sich ablehnt, ist selbst aufgeklärt
und verdient von der dankbaren Welt und Nachwelt als derjenige gepriesen
zu werden, der zuerst das menschliche Geschlecht der Unmündigkeit,
wenigstens von seiten der Regierung, entschlug und jedem frei ließ, sich
in allem, was Gewissensangelegenheit ist, seiner eigenen Vernunft zu
bedienen. Unter ihm dürfen verehrungswürdige Geistliche, unbeschadet
ihrer Amtspflicht, ihre vom angenommenen Symbol hier oder da abweichenden
Urteile und Einsichten in der Qualität der Gelehrten frei und öffentlich
der Welt zur Prüfung darlegen; noch mehr aber jeder andere, der durch
keine Amtspflicht eingeschränkt ist. Dieser Geist der Freiheit breitet
sich auch außerhalb aus, selbst da, wo er mit äußeren Hindernissen einer
sich selbst mißverstehenden Regierung zu ringen hat. Denn es leuchtet
dieser doch ein Beispiel vor, daß bei Freiheit für die öffentliche Ruhe
und Einigkeit des gemeinen Wesens nicht das mindeste zu besorgen sei.
Die Menschen arbeiten sich von selbst nach und nach aus der Rohigkeit
heraus, wenn man nur nicht absichtlich künstelt, um sie darin zu
erhalten.

Ich habe den Hauptpunkt der Aufklärung, d. i. des Ausganges der Menschen
aus ihrer selbstverschuldeten Unmündigkeit, vorzüglich in =Religionssachen=
gesetzt, weil in Ansehung der Künste und Wissenschaften unsere
Beherrscher kein Interesse haben, den Vormund über ihre Untertanen zu
spielen, überdem auch jene Unmündigkeit, so wie die schädlichste, also
auch die entehrendste unter allen ist. Aber die Denkungsart eines
Staatsoberhaupts, der die erstere begünstigt, geht noch weiter und sieht
ein: daß selbst in Ansehung seiner =Gesetzgebung= es ohne Gefahr sei,
seinen Untertanen zu erlauben, von ihrer eigenen Vernunft =öffentlichen=
Gebrauch zu machen und ihre Gedanken über eine bessere Abfassung
derselben, sogar mit einer freimütigen Kritik der schon gegebenen, der
Welt öffentlich vorzulegen; davon wir ein glänzendes Beispiel haben,
wodurch noch kein Monarch demjenigen vorging, welchen wir verehren.

Aber auch nur derjenige, der, selbst aufgeklärt, sich nicht vor Schatten
fürchtet, zugleich aber ein wohldiszipliniertes zahlreiches Heer zum
Bürgen der öffentlichen Ruhe zur Hand hat, -- kann das sagen, was ein
Freistaat nicht wagen darf: =Räsonniert, soviel ihr wollt, und worüber
ihr wollt; nur gehorcht!= So zeigt sich hier ein befremdlicher, nicht
erwarteter Gang menschlicher Dinge; sowie auch sonst, wenn man ihn im
großen betrachtet, darin fast alles paradox ist. Ein größerer Grad
bürgerlicher Freiheit scheint der Freiheit des =Geistes= des Volks
vorteilhaft und setzt ihr doch unübersteigliche Schranken; ein Grad
weniger von jener verschafft hingegen diesem Raum, sich nach allem
seinen Vermögen auszubreiten. Wenn denn die Natur unter dieser harten
Hülle den Keim, für den sie am zärtlichsten sorgt, nämlich den Hang und
Beruf zum =freien Denken=, ausgewickelt hat: so wirkt dieser allmählich
zurück auf die Sinnesart des Volks, (wodurch dies der =Freiheit zu
handeln= nach und nach fähiger wird), und endlich auch sogar auf die
Grundsätze der =Regierung=, die es ihr selbst zuträglich findet, den
Menschen, der nun =mehr als Maschine= ist, seiner Würde gemäß zu
behandeln.[1]

Königsberg in Preußen, den 30. Septemb. 1784.

                                               =I. Kant.=

  [1] In den =Büsching=schen Wöchentlichen Nachrichten vom 13. Sept. lese
  ich heute den 30. ebendess. die Anzeige der Berlinischen Monatsschrift
  von diesem Monat, worin des Herrn =Mendelssohn= Beantwortung
  ebenderselben Frage angeführt wird. Mir ist sie noch nicht zu Händen
  gekommen; sonst würde sie die gegenwärtige zurückgehalten haben, die
  jetzt nur zum Versuche dastehen mag, wiefern der Zufall Einstimmigkeit
  der Gedanken zuwege bringen könne.




Lesarten


Drucke:

1. Berlinische Monatsschrift. Dezember-Heft 1784. S. 481-494.

2. Kant. Kleine Schriften. Neuwied 1793. Haupt. 8o. S. 34-50.

3. I. Kant. Zerstreute Aufsätze. Frankfurt und Leipzig 1793. 8o. S. 25-37.

4. I. Kant. Sämmtliche kleine Schriften. 4 Bände. 1797-98. 8o.
Königsberg u. Leipzig (Voigt, Jena). Nachdruck. Bd. III, S. 159-172.

5. I. Kant's vermischte Schriften. 3 Bände. Halle 1799. (Tieftrunk).
Bd. II. S. 687-700.

6. Kant. Vorzügliche kleine Schriften und Aufsätze, hrsg. mit Noten von
F. Ch. Starke. 2 Bände. Leipzig 1833 und Quedlinburg 1838. Bd. I, S. 75-84.

                   *       *       *       *       *

170, 23 hiebei] Vorl. bemerkt dazu: sc. etwa »hervorzuheben«. 171, 10
v. u. seinen (T)] seinem (A) 174, 20 höchsten (A, 93)] höchster (so alle
späteren Ausgaben). 175, 20 d. i.] die (A)




  [ Im folgenden werden alle geänderten Textzeilen angeführt, wobei
    jeweils zuerst die Zeile wie im Original, danach die geänderte Zeile
    steht.

  und seiner Gemeine nach dem Symbol der Kirche, der er dient, seinen
  und seiner Gemeinde nach dem Symbol der Kirche, der er dient, seinen

  wenigsten von seiten der Regierung, entschlug und jedem frei ließ, sich
  wenigstens von seiten der Regierung, entschlug und jedem frei ließ, sich

  ]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist
Aufklärung?, by Immanuel Kant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEANTWORTUNG DER FRAGE ***

***** This file should be named 30821-8.txt or 30821-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/8/2/30821/

Produced by Jana Srna and Philipp Zeinlinger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
